Play Hive Like a Champion
®

Second Edition

Strategy,
Tactics and
Commentary
by Randy Ingersoll
BoardSpace 2011 Online Hive® Champion
With foreword by John Yianni
Designer of Hive®

.

Play Hive Like a Champion
®

Second Edition

Strategy,
Tactics and
Commentary
by Randy Ingersoll
BoardSpace 2011 Online Hive® Champion

Play Hive® Like a Champion
Play Hive® Like a Champion, second edition
Copyright © 2013 by Randy Ingersoll

All rights reserved under International and Pan-American Copyright Conventions.

No part of this book may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic or
mechanical, including photocopying, recording, or by any information storage or retrieval system, without
permission in writing from the publisher.
Published by:

Randall M. Ingersoll

5808 Southport Drive

Port Orange FL 32127

Hive is a registered trademark of Gen42 Games, London, UK.
®

Hive® image on page iv and Hive® Carbon image on page vii are used with permission.

Design and layout assistance provided by Christian Sperling.

The layout of the PDF format for this book has been designed with gutters to allow the reader to properly
print and bind a hardcopy.

by Randy Ingersoll

Table of Contents

Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . iv
Foreword by John Yianni . . . . . . . . . . . . . . vi

1. Basic Rules
1.1
1.2
1.3
1.4
1.5

How to Win . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Starting the Game . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Placing a New Bug . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Basic Principles of Bug Movement . .
Bug Quantities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

2.1
2.2
2.3
2.4
2.5
2.6
2.7
2.8

Queen Bee . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
Beetle . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
Ant . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
Spider . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
Grasshopper . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
Mosquito . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
Ladybug . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
Pillbug . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12

3.1
3.2
3.3
3.4
3.5
3.6

Piece Name . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Target Space - Reference Piece . . . .
Target Space - Orientation . . . . . . . .
Sample Move Notation . . . . . . . . . . .
Online Play and Game Review . . . .
Standard Position . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

15
15
16
16
17
18

4.1
4.2
4.3
4.4
4.5

Gate . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Door . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Ring . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Elbow . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Pocket . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

19
20
20
21
23

5.1
5.2
5.3
5.4
5.5
5.6
5.7
5.8

Three Keys to Victory . . . . . . . . . . . .
Attack or Defend . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Place or Play . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Strategy and Bugs in the Hive . . . . . .
Opening Strategy for White . . . . . . .
Opening Strategy for Black . . . . . . . .
Midgame Strategy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Endgame Strategy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32

2. The Bugs

3. Notation

4. Common Hive Formations

5. Strategy in the Hive

1
1
2
2
4

6. Elementary Tactics
6.1
6.2
6.3
6.4
6.5

The Pin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
The Cover . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
The Block . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
The Fill . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Bug Placement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

33
41
47
51
57

7.1
7.2
7.3
7.4
7.5
7.6
7.7
7.8
7.9
7.10
7.11
7.12
7.13
7.14
7.15
7.16
7.17

Counting Bugs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Defending the Queen . . . . . . . . . .
Controlling Bug Placement . . . . . .
Counter Attack . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
The Shutout . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Making a Ring . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Playing for a Draw . . . . . . . . . . . . .
The Squeeze . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
The Hop Around . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Two Beetle Attack . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Using Your Spiders . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Counting Tempo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mosquito Conversion . . . . . . . . . . .
The Ladybug . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
The Pillbug . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Psychology in the Hive . . . . . . . . .
The Pin Revisited . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

67
73
81
89
97
105
113
119
125
131
139
149
155
161
169
193
199

8.1
8.2
8.3
8.4
8.5
8.6

Misusing Your Ants . . . . . . . . . . . .
Allowing the Queen to Escape . . .
Making a Ring . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Wasting Tempo in the Opening . . .
Failing to Defend Your Queen . . .
Allowing a Shutout . . . . . . . . . . . .

209
214
216
217
219
220

7. Advanced Tactics

8. Beginners’ Mistakes

9. Opening Theory
9.1
9.2
9.3
9.4

Basic Concepts
Elbow Openings
Inline Openings
Other Openings

...............
..............
...............
...............

223
224
225
227

10. Appendices

10.1 Bug Movement atop the Hive . . . . 229
10.2 Additional Bugs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 233
10.3 Game Index . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 247
iii

Play Hive® Like a Champion

Introduction
About the Game

Hive® is an addictive strategic ‘board’ game for two players.
Because no actual board is used, it can be played anywhere on
any flat surface. The basic game consists of 22 hexagonal
pieces: 11 white, 11 black. The pieces represent five different
types of bugs, each with its own unique way of moving. With
no setup required, the game begins with the placement of the
first bug. As the pieces are placed, a pattern quickly forms.
This hexagonal pattern, for obvious reasons, becomes the
hive.
Hive® was invented in 2001 by John Yianni and is published
by Gen42 Games, London, UK. The game was expanded
when the Mosquito was made available in 2007, followed by
the Ladybug in 2010, and the Pillbug in 2013. Awards won
include the 2006 Mensa Select and 2006 Dr Toy Smart Toy
Product Excellence Award.

Hive® cover art from game box

It is available for purchase at leading game and hobby stores
around the world. For more information, please visit the
official Hive® website at www.gen42.com/hive. To join the
ever expanding worldwide community of Hive® players, you
may register to play online at www.BoardSpace.net.

About the Book

Chapters one and two introduce the basics of the game,
including rules and bugs. These two chapters may be skipped
by experienced players.

Chapters three and four are important for all players: chapter
three, because knowing how to read movement notation is
vital to follow along with the 100+ games that are used to
illustrate the tactics and concepts being taught, and chapter
four, because recognizing the basic formations is key to
becoming a better player.

An overview of strategy is the subject of chapter five. Five
elementary tactics are introduced in chapter six and then the
heart of the book is chapter seven, discussing seventeen more
advanced tactics that are sure to improve the performance of
any player.
Randy’s handwritten notes on chapter 5
iv

by Randy Ingersoll
Rounding out the discussion regarding tactics is chapter eight,
Beginners’ Mistakes. Beginning players may wish to jump
ahead, read this chapter early, and immediately begin
applying the lessons taught therein. All readers, of course, are
invited to survey the table of contents and read and study the
tactics in any order. Experienced players may identify tactics
that they have already used or possibly learn about tactics that
have already been used against them.
The book concludes with a brief discussion of Hive® openings
in chapter nine, an in-depth discussion of Beetle/Mosquito/
Ladybug/Pillbug movement atop the hive in the first section
of chapter ten and an overview of some of the ideas for
additional expansion bugs in the second section of chapter
ten.

About the Author

Randy Ingersoll lives in Port Orange, Florida, USA with his
wonderful wife, Diane. He is a recovering chess-a-holic who
happened across Hive® in 2006. After playing a few games
online at BoardSpace he promptly forgot about the game and
played sparingly for the next four years. In July 2010, he
visited BoardSpace and again played the game, this time with
a bit more enthusiasm. He quickly fell in love with the game
and set it as his goal to become a better player.
Under the tutelage of Christian Sperling (Eucalyx on
BoardSpace) he rapidly improved and his enthusiasm became
even more intense. His improvement continued as he played
against other BoardSpace opponents, including Jason Wallace
(DrRaven), Dimitris Kopsidas (Fumanchu), and David
Gburek (BlackMagic) all of whom quickly became online
friends. In the spring of 2011, he entered and won the 2011
BoardSpace Online Championship, beating his friends,
Fumanchu in the semi-finals and DrRaven in the finals.

Randy playing Hive® with Kate,
his granddaughter

Since there were not any books available on the subject, he
decided that he would write one himself. With editorial and
layout help from both Christian and Jason, the first edition
of the book became available in May 2012. Thanks also to
Jeffrey Yang, who designed the offline Hive® reviewer used
to review hundreds of games searching for examples to
demonstrate the important concepts discussed in this book.

Randy wishes you the best in your learning to play the game.
May you enjoy and benefit from this book. He looks forward
to playing you at BoardSpace. Feel free to challenge him to a
game. You may contact him at rmingersoll@gmail.com.
v

Play Hive® Like a Champion

Foreword

by John Yianni, Designer of Hive®
When Randy Ingersoll first told me that he was writing a
strategy book on how to play Hive®, I was a bit taken aback.
You see, this year marks the 30th anniversary of when I first
had the idea for Hive.

Having a book written about a game that I invented is a tad
humbling, to say the least.

As you’ve guessed my name is John Yianni, the designer of
Hive®, amongst other games. I work as a full time games
designer, making my living doing what I love, although a lot
of people (me included) will tell you this is near impossible.

If you are reading this then I guess you already know Hive®
or at least have heard of the game. But what you may not
know are the humble beginnings that first gave this game life
and the road, my family and I have travelled to get here.
Hive® started life as an idea I had, whilst watching a film 30
years back. The main characters were two old friends that met
everyday in a park to play Chess. They would come together,
each bringing one half of the board and half the pieces. I don’t
remember the name of the film but I do remember what
inspired me. Looking at the unused empty spaces on their
chessboard I wondered, could I design a game that had no
need of a board, but still kept the essence of what makes
Chess so appealing? The rest as they say, is history (and a lot
of hard graft).

When I think back to the beginning, summer days spent with
good friends in our back garden, sanding wooden blocks,
nights spent sticking insect stickers by hand onto hexagons.
All in the endeavour to make our first batch of Hive® games!
I recall those days as a special time, when things seemed
simpler, a time of adventure and a time where we believed
anything was possible.
But that’s quite enough about me. Let’s get to what you really
want to know, is this book any good? What hidden secrets lay
within these pages? Why should you read it and can it really
live up to its title and teach you how to ‘Play Hive® Like a
Champion’?

If you’re a novice or a seasoned player the benefits of reading
this book will differ, but one thing that resounds is the way
Randy Ingersoll takes the game we all love and magnifies it,
so that we see it through fresh eyes. He gives us a newfound
vi

John Yianni, Designer of Hive®

by Randy Ingersoll
respect for the game, by uncovering its many layers and
revealing why we continue to play it, sometimes years after
our first encounter. He takes the game and breaks it down to
its essence, focusing on every part, whilst educating us in the
subtle plays that distinguish a Hive player from a Hive®
Champion. His eloquent writing style helps to make the many
chapters of the book an easy read. At the same time he breaks
down each one into bite size pieces, making what could have
been a mammoth reading task, into a valuable resource.
I especially like how Randy has assigned names to each
tactic, which resemble, (well at least in my mind) that great
1973 classic film, ‘The Sting.’ Each play has a name that
resounds of a well-planned hustle; The Fill, The Cover, The
Shutout, The Squeeze. All we need are the cheeky smiles of
Paul Newman and Robert Redford and the scene will be set.
New converts to the game will find this book a treasure trove
of tantalizing tips, that all work together to form a well
rounded strategy. They may even discover something about
themselves in the book, when pondering over why they make
certain moves that seem right, but don’t quite know why.
Bringing me to what I consider is of most value to even
seasoned players of the game. This book will inspire even
those of us who have played the game for many years, to
focus and define our own playing style, highlighting and
outlining why we play the way we do. Why we go for The
Squeeze, or why we would rather place a Spider in that
precise position, or move an Ant to block, rather than
surround.

Hive® Carbon, introduced in 2011

I do appreciate how Randy does not presume to hand us the
best strategy for the win, as if there could be just one. Instead
he decides to take us on a journey through this beautiful land
called Hive® and on the way, like a trusted guide, revealing to
us the many paths that can lead us to victory. If walked
correctly. This is the very reason why this book will not only
be appreciated when read for the first time, but will also prove
to be a lasting reference and guide that is often returned to.
If you asked me to offer you just one statement that would
describe this book, then I would have to say; “This is how you
play Hive®, the way you always knew you could.”

John Yianni
Designer of Hive®
June 27, 2012

vii

Play Hive® Like a Champion

viii

by Randy Ingersoll

Chapter 1 – Basic Rules

Chapter 1 – Basic Rules
1.1 – How to Win

The object of Hive® is to completely surround your
opponent’s Queen Bee, while at the same time blocking your
opponent from surrounding your Queen Bee. The winner is
the first player to reach this objective. Please note that the
pieces surrounding the Queen can belong to either player.
You are not required to surround your opponent’s Queen
solely with your own pieces. In Figure 1.1 by moving Ant #3
into space A, White surrounds the Black Queen and wins.

Figure 1.1
The Black Queen is surrounded: White wins.

Draws are possible. If, for example, the final move surrounds
both Queens simultaneously, the game is declared a draw.
Please look at Figure 1.2 where both Queens are surrounded
when White Hopper #3 jumps into space A.

The game is also declared a draw when the exact same
position, with the same player having the next move, occurs
three times. Finally, a game can be declared a draw by mutual
agreement. (When playing online at www.BoardSpace.net,
each player must repeat the same position until the computer
recognizes the draw.)

A

Figure 1.2
Both Queens are surrounded: a draw.

1.2 – Starting the Game

The game begins with the first player, playing White, placing
any piece other than the Queen.* Next, the second player,
playing Black, places any piece other than the Queen,
adjacent to White’s first piece. As an example please note
Figure 1.3 showing the position after White’s initial
placement of a Hopper followed by Black’s placement of
a Spider. Play continues with the two players playing
alternately, each player either placing a new bug or moving a
bug of his color already in the hive.
By rule, the Queen cannot be placed on the first turn* and
must be placed no later than a player’s fourth turn. Until the
Queen is placed, a player’s bugs already in the hive may not
move.

A

Figure 1.3
First moves by White and Black

1

2

A player with no legal placement or move must pass. A player
cannot pass if a legal placement or move is available. Even if
the only available moves will allow the opponent to win,
a player must make a move or placement if one is available.
*White playing first and the prohibition of the Queen from being the first bug
played are not official Hive® rules, but are used on BoardSpace and in this book.

Page 1

Chapter 1 – Basic Rules

Play Hive® Like a Champion

1.3 – Placing a New Bug

When a new bug is added to the hive, its initial placement
must meet two requirements. First, the new bug must be
placed adjacent to a friendly bug. Second, its initial placement
cannot be adjacent to any enemy bugs. In Figure 1.4 White
may only place a bug in spaces labeled W, Black may only
place a bug in spaces labeled B, and neither player may place
a bug in the two spaces labeled X. (Please note that these
restrictions do not apply to each player’s first bug placement.)

Figure 1.4
Bug Placement

W

X

B

W

B
W

X

B

If there are no spaces in or around the hive that meet these
requirements, a new bug may not be placed. If, as the game
progresses, a space becomes available, the player may then
resume placing additional bugs.
Bugs may not be placed atop another bug, even a friendly
one. And finally, for bug placement purposes, only the color
of the topmost, visible bug is considered.

1.4 – Basic Principles of Bug Movement

Until a player’s Queen is brought into the game, bugs
previously placed may not move. Once a player’s Queen has
been placed, however, that player’s bugs already in the hive
are free to move. Each bug has its own unique style
of movement. When a bug moves it must adhere to three basic
principles, unless its Special Rule provides an explicit
exception.
1.4.1 – One Hive

All bugs in play must be linked together in one hive. At no
time during a bug’s move may the hive be separated into more
than one group. The One Hive principle applies at the start of
a move, during the move, and at the conclusion of the move.

Even if the final resting place for a bug would reunite the
hive, a move violates the One Hive principle if at any time
during the bug’s move the hive is separated into more than
one group. In Figure 1.5 for example, White Ant #1 may not
move because doing so would separate Black Ant #1 from the
remainder of the hive. Even if White Ant #1 were to move to
space A and reunite the hive, the move would still not be
allowed because during the move the hive would be separated
into more than one group. This would violate the One Hive
rule. There are NO exceptions to the One Hive rule; it must
always be obeyed.

Page 2

Figure 1.5
One Hive rule – White Ant #1 may not move.
A

by Randy Ingersoll

Chapter 1 – Basic Rules

1.4.2 – Freedom to Move

Standard bug movement is performed by sliding from one
space to an adjacent space. A bug may only slide through the
gap between two bugs if there is clearly enough room for
the moving bug to fit. In Figure 1.6 bugs may not slide into
space A because there is not enough clearance between the
White Spider and the Black Ant. For more information on this
subject see Section 4.1 – Gate.
If a piece is surrounded to the point that it can no longer
physically slide out of its position, it may not be moved.
Please note Figure 1.7. Black Spider #1 may not move. There
is not enough clearance between the White Spider and the
Black Ant for the Black Spider to slide through.

The Freedom to Move rule does not restrict placement as long
as no placing rules are violated. A bug may be placed into a
space from which it may not move. In Figure 1.8 any White
bug may be placed in space A, even though after doing so the
Freedom to Move rule would not allow an Ant or Spider to
move.
Note that the Special Rules for the Beetle, Grasshopper, and
Ladybug make exceptions to the Freedom to Move rule. See
their descriptions in Chapter 2 for more details.
1.4.3 – Constant Contact

All bugs in play must remain in constant contact with the
hive. At no time during its move may a bug lose contact with
the hive. This rule applies to all bugs, but due to their limited
movement, typically affects only Queens, Beetles, and
occasionally Spiders.
In Figure 1.9 even though space A is only one space away
and within the movement range of the Black Queen, she may
not move there. During the move, the Queen would lose
contact with the hive and violate the Constant Contact rule.

Figure 1.6
Freedom to Move rule – Part 1
Bugs may not ‘slide’ into space A.

A

Figure 1.7
Freedom to Move rule – Part 2
Black Spider #1 may not move.
A

Figure 1.8
Freedom to Move rule – Part 3
White bugs may be placed in space A.

A

Figure 1.9
Constant Contact rule
Black Queen may not move to space A.
A

Page 3

Chapter 1 – Basic Rules

Play Hive® Like a Champion

1.5 – Bug Quantities

The number of bugs of each type available to each player (as
shown in Figure 1.10) is as follows: one Queen, two Beetles,
two Spiders, three Ants, and three Hoppers. When the
Mosquito, Ladybug and/or Pillbug are used, then the bug
count of each of these bugs is one.

Figure 1.10

The Standard Bugs
Queen
Beetle

Ant

Spider

Hopper

The Expansion Bugs
Mosquito
Ladybug

Page 4

Pillbug

by Randy Ingersoll

Chapter 2 – The Bugs

Chapter 2 – The Bugs
2.1 – Queen Bee - Q

The Queen Bee is the center of attention in
our hive, just as she is the center of attention
in a real hive. The dual goals of protecting
your Queen while attacking your opponent’s
must always be kept closely in mind while
playing Hive®.

Movement – The Queen Bee, more commonly referred to as
just the Queen, moves one space in any direction, but while
doing so must obey all basic movement rules. In Figure 2.1
the Black Queen can move one space to either of the two
spaces labeled A. In Figure 2.2 the White Queen, due to the
special formation called a Ring (Section 4.3), can move to
any of the four spaces labeled B.
Placement – The Queen cannot be placed on turn one*, but
must be placed no later than turn four. This means that if a
player has already placed three other bugs on his first three
turns, that player’s fourth placement must be the Queen.
Special Rules – A player may not move any other bug until
that player’s own Queen has been placed. The game ends
when a player’s Queen is completely surrounded. (See
Section 1.1 – How to Win.)

Figure 2.1
Queen Movement – Part 1

A

A

Figure 2.2
Queen Movement – Part 2
B
B

B
B

Strengths – The ability to move in all directions.
Weaknesses – Slow movement and the need to be protected.

2.2 – Beetle - B

In real life beetles can be very powerful,
although admittedly slow-moving, bugs. This
is well reflected here where the Beetle is one
of the most powerful bugs. Its ability to climb
atop the hive and cover other bugs gives it
this great power on offense and defense.

* In order to minimize draws between experienced players, tournament rules,
which do not allow Queen placement on turn one, will be in effect throughout this
book.

Page 5

Chapter 2 – The Bugs
Movement – The Beetle, similar to the Queen, moves one
space in any direction. Unlike the Queen, however, the Beetle
can climb atop another bug. (See Special Rules below.)

Notice the movement options for the two Beetles in
Figure 2.3 and Figure 2.4. In the first figure, the White
Beetle can move to space A1, space A2, or atop any of four
adjacent Black bugs: Hopper #1, Spider #1, Spider #2, and
Hopper #2. In the second figure, the Black Beetle can make a
sliding move to either of the spaces labeled B or can climb
atop either of the two adjacent bugs: White Ant #1 or Black
Hopper #2.

Even though a Beetle can climb up onto the hive it still
must obey the Freedom to Move rule. If another bug were in
space A of Figure 2.4, the Black Beetle could climb atop it.
But since it is sliding from ground level to ground level it
does not fit between White Ant #1 and Black Hopper #2, and
thus, may not move directly to space A. It may, however, go
up and over either adjacent bug and arrive there in two moves.

Placement – Placement of the Beetle must obey all standard
placement rules. (Please note that the Beetle’s ability to climb
atop the hive does not give it the ability to be directly placed
atop another bug.)
Special Rules – When all other standard movement
conditions have been met, a Beetle may climb atop another
bug. When atop the hive the Beetle may move from bug to
bug, obeying all other standard movement rules, of course.
Bugs trapped by a Beetle on top of them may not move.
To determine new bug placement restrictions, the color of the
topmost, visible bug is used. Note that the ability to climb on
the hive can be thought of as a circumvention of the Freedom
to Move rule, but while moving on the same level the Beetle
is subject to the Freedom to Move rule.*
Strengths – The ability to climb atop the hive. Offensively,
the Beetle can reach interior spaces that may not be accessible
to other bugs. Defensively, the Beetle can cover another bug
(particularly the opposing Queen) and render it immobile.
While on top of an opposing bug, the Beetle also potentially
allows placement next to its position, if all other normal
placement conditions are met.
Weaknesses – A slow speed of movement.
* For a more thorough discussion of the Freedom to Move rule regarding Beetle
movement atop the hive, see Chapter 10.1 – Bug Movement atop the Hive.

Page 6

Play Hive® Like a Champion
Figure 2.3
Beetle Movement – Part 1

A2
A1

Figure 2.4
Beetle Movement – Part 2
B
B
A

by Randy Ingersoll

2.3 – Ant - A

In nature, ants seem to be always on the
move, running this way and that to search for
food or to defend the nest. This is well
represented by the great mobility of the Ant,
the fastest and most mobile bug in the
standard game of Hive®.

Movement – The Ant is the most mobile of all the bugs.
It may move from its current space to any space adjacent to
the hive. As with other bugs, the One Hive, Freedom to Move,
and the Constant Contact rules must be obeyed.
In Figure 2.5 White Ant #1 can move to any of the gray
shaded spaces!
Placement – Placement of the Ant must obey all standard
placement rules.

Chapter 2 – The Bugs

Figure 2.5
Ant Movement – Part 1

Figure 2.6
Ant Movement – Part 2

Special Rules – None.
Strengths – Speed and agility. The Ant is the strongest of all
the basic bugs. Offensively, the Ant can speed around the hive
threatening any space that it may reach.

Defensively, an Ant can easily and quickly pin (Chapter 6.1 –
The Pin) enemy bugs on the outside of the hive.

A

B

te
Ga

Weaknesses – The Ant has no glaring weaknesses. Because
the Ant has no special movement ability and must obey the
Freedom to Move rule, there are situations where an Ant
cannot reach a specific open space. Two examples where Ants
cannot reach specific spaces are shown in Figure 2.6. As in
the previous figure, White Ant #1 can move to any of the gray
shaded spaces except space A or space B.

Space A is completely surrounded and therefore not
accessible without special movement ability. Space B is open
to the exterior of the hive, but is protected with a gate
(Section 4.1) and is, therefore, also not accessible to White
Ant #1.

Page 7

Chapter 2 – The Bugs

2.4 – Spider - S

The only arachnid in the hive is the Spider.
Just as a real spider can be very dangerous,
our Spider, properly placed in the hive, can
dart in and execute a well-planned attack.
A good player derives satisfaction from
learning how to use this weakest of the bugs.

Movement – The Spider moves three and only three spaces;
no more, no less. As with other bugs, the One Hive, Freedom
to Move, and the Constant Contact rules must be obeyed. In
Figure 2.7 you can see how the White Spider moves exactly
three spaces to either space A or space B.
Placement – Placement of the Spider must obey all standard
placement rules.

Play Hive® Like a Champion

Figure 2.7
Spider Movement – Part 1
A

B

Figure 2.8
Spider Movement – Part 2
C

Special Rules – None.
Strengths – None.
Weaknesses – The Spider’s three space movement severely
limits its access to any specific space. Extra care must be
taken when initially placing a Spider to ensure that it can
reach its intended position. Compare Figure 2.7 to
Figure 2.8. Note the differences between the two positions.
If your goal were to pin the Black Queen (Chapter 6.1 – The
Pin), you would place your Spider as in Figure 2.7 and then
move to space A. If, however, you were looking to keep Black
from placing a new bug in space E, then the initial placement
in Figure 2.8, with a move to space D would be the better
choice.

2.5 – Grasshopper - G

With their large, powerful hind legs and
strong wings, the real life grasshopper can
jump or fly virtually anywhere. In our game,
its counterpart has the ability to circumvent
the Freedom to Move rule and jump into and
out of confined spaces!

Movement – The Grasshopper, known more commonly just
as the Hopper, has a very unique movement, matching its real
life counterpart’s jumping ability. As with other bugs, the
Page 8

D

E

by Randy Ingersoll
One Hive and the Constant Contact rules must be obeyed.
But because of its special movement ability, the Freedom to
Move rule does not apply to the Hopper.

Chapter 2 – The Bugs
Figure 2.9
Hopper Movement – Part 1
B

Placement – Placement of the Hopper must obey all standard
placement rules.
Special Rules – The Hopper does not move in the standard
manner, but jumps from its current space, over a straight row
of adjacent pieces, to the first unoccupied space along the
row. In order to move, it must jump over at least one other
bug. In Figure 2.9 Black Hopper #2 can choose to move to
any of the four labeled spaces.
Strengths – The ability to hop into otherwise inaccessible
spaces and the ability to hop out of surrounded spaces.
Offensively, the Hopper can be used to hop into an inaccessible
space. Many games end when a Hopper, coming from the
outer edges of the hive, hops into the final open space
adjacent to the enemy Queen. Defensively, a Hopper, adjacent
to the friendly Queen, can hop out, thus keeping the friendly
Queen from being surrounded.

A

C

D

Figure 2.10
Hopper Movement – Part 2

A

Weaknesses – Due to the Hopper’s unique movement, access
to any specific space may be limited. Like the Spider, care
must be taken when placing the Hopper to ensure access to its
intended destination. A player on the defense, with only one
open space next to the Queen, can quite often stave off defeat
by restricting placement of a Hopper.

In Figure 2.10 White can win by getting a bug to space A.
To get White’s final Hopper into that space, it must be placed
in one of the five unlabeled gray spaces. But by carefully
moving bugs adjacent to each of those spaces, Black has
rendered White unable to place the final Hopper into a
position to hop into space A and win.

2.6 – Mosquito - M (available as an expansion)

Anyone who has spent any time outdoors has
no doubt been irritated and possibly bitten by
a pesky mosquito. In our hive, the Mosquito,
with its ability to mimic any other bug, is
hard to combat and thus will irritate even the
best player!

Page 9

Chapter 2 – The Bugs
Movement – The Mosquito has no inherent movement ability
on its own. It acquires its movement from any piece that is
adjacent to it (i.e., in physical contact with it). For example, if
adjacent to an Ant, it may move as an Ant. If adjacent to a
Beetle, it may move as a Beetle. If adjacent to an Ant and a
Beetle, it may move as an Ant or as a Beetle. If adjacent to a
stack of bugs, the Mosquito only acquires movement from the
topmost, visible bug. As with other bugs, the One Hive,
Freedom to Move, and Constant Contact rules must be
obeyed as they are applied to the Mosquito’s current form of
movement.
In Figure 2.11 the Black Mosquito is adjacent to both a
Hopper and the Queen. Moving as a Hopper, it can jump to
either of the spaces labeled A. Moving as a Queen, it can slide
to either of the spaces labeled B.

Play Hive® Like a Champion
Figure 2.11
Mosquito Movement – Part 1
A
B
A
B

Figure 2.12
Mosquito Movement – Part 2

Placement – Placement of the Mosquito must obey all
standard placement rules.
Special Rules – If moved as a Beetle atop the hive, it
continues to move as if it were a Beetle until it climbs down
from the hive. Then it again behaves just like a Mosquito.
Since Mosquitoes have no inherent movement ability of their
own, if the only bug adjacent to a Mosquito is another
Mosquito, it cannot move. Likewise, when moving as a
Beetle atop the hive, a Mosquito does not transfer the Beetle
movement to another Mosquito.

In Figure 2.12 the Black Mosquito is atop the White Queen.
It will only move as if it were a Beetle. The White Mosquito
is adjacent to the White Ant and the Queen/Mosquito stack.
It can only move like an Ant. It does not gain any movement
ability from the Black Mosquito, even though the Black
Mosquito is acting like a Beetle. Note that in Figure 2.13, the
Ant has been removed and now the White Mosquito, being
adjacent only to another Mosquito, is not able to move at all.

Strengths – In many respects, the Mosquito is the strongest
of all bugs. During play, it may have the speed and agility of
an Ant, the ability to climb atop the hive like a Beetle, or the
ability to hop into vacant spaces like the Hopper.
Weaknesses – Care must be taken when moving a Mosquito
because its movement will change depending on what bugs
will be adjacent to it after the move. Opponents may also
move bugs away from a Mosquito to intentionally limit its
movement.
Page 10

Q

A

B

Figure 2.13
Mosquito Movement – Part 3

Q

by Randy Ingersoll

2.7 – Ladybug - L (available as an expansion)

Although beautiful, a real ladybug can be a
voracious predator, attacking and eating
many garden pests. With a movement pattern
unlike any other bug, our Ladybug is a
dangerous bug on the attack, but also has the
ability to defend her friendly Queen.

Movement – The Ladybug has a very unique and interesting
movement. Like a Spider, it moves exactly three spaces. But
the three space movement must follow a very strict pattern.
The first move must take the Ladybug atop the hive.
The second move must also be atop the hive and the third
move must take it down off the hive.* The Ladybug must start
and end its movement off the hive. It cannot end its
movement atop another bug.
The Black Ladybug in Figure 2.14 can move to any of the ten
gray spaces. Movement to eight of the spaces is probably very
easy to see. Movement to space A and space B, however, may
not be so apparent. Let’s take space A as an example.
Figure 2.15 shows the Ladybug’s path as it arrives at
space A. First it climbs atop the Black Hopper. Then it moves
atop the White Spider and then, finally, lands in space A.

Chapter 2 – The Bugs

Figure 2.14
Ladybug Movement – Part 1

A

B

Figure 2.15
Ladybug Movement – Part 2

A

Placement – Ladybug placement must obey all standard
placement rules.
Special Rules – Other than its unique movement, the
Ladybug has no additional special rules. Note, however, that
this movement is an exception to the Freedom to Move rule.
Strengths – As an attacker the Ladybug is very powerful.
Like the Hopper it can move into completely surrounded
spaces, but due to its unique movement pattern it has more
flexibility in initial placement. Unlike the Hopper, the
Ladybug can also, if circumstances are just right, move to an
adjacent space. (Please see the above note regarding space A
in Figure 2.14.) If placed adjacent to the Queen as a defender,
the Ladybug can easily fly out, opening the spot or possibly
even freeing the Queen to escape.
Weaknesses – Movement around the hive can be slow and
tedious.
* Please see Section 10.1.4 – Ladybug Movement atop the Hive to see how the
Freedom to Move rule may restrict the Ladybug’s movement.

Page 11

Chapter 2 – The Bugs

2.8 – Pillbug - P (available as an expansion)

Our hive’s first primarily defensive bug, the
Pillbug is truly a unique piece, unlike
anything currently in play. It changes the
complexion of the game and forces a
successful player to always keep its special
ability in mind.

Movement – The Pillbug moves one space in any direction,
just like the Queen. While moving, it must obey all standard
movement rules. In Figure 2.16 the White Pillbug can move
to either of the spaces labeled A.

Play Hive® Like a Champion

Figure 2.16
Pillbug movement

A

A

Figure 2.17
Pillbug Special Rule
A

Placement – Pillbug placement must obey all standard
placement rules.
Special Rules – As well as having its own movement ability,
the Pillbug has a special power: the power to move other
bugs! When the circumstances allow, a Pillbug can pick up an
adjacent bug (either friendly or opposing) and move it up on
itself and then down into a different, unoccupied, adjacent
space. In Figure 2.17 the Black Pillbug may pick up the
White Spider and move it to any of the spaces labeled A.
But it may not move the Black Queen because doing so would
violate the One Hive rule.

A
A

Figure 2.18
Freedom to Move rule

In addition, the Freedom to Move rule, as it applies to
movement atop the hive, may affect the Pillbug’s special
ability. In Figure 2.18 the White Pillbug may move the White
Queen to space A but, may not move it to space B. This is
because doing so would require that the White Queen move
up and through the two Beetle stacks. The Freedom to Move
rule, however, does not allow this to occur.*

A Pillbug may only move another bug if the bug to be moved
is on ground level and neither it nor the Pillbug are covered
by a bug atop the hive. In Figure 2.19 the White Pillbug may
not move either Black Beetle #1 or the White Ant below it.

A bug that has just been moved, either by a Pillbug or
by using its own movement ability, is immune from the
Pillbug’s special ability in the immediate following turn.
In Figure 2.20 (page 13 from the game U!HV-kkurtonisringersoll-2013-04-02-0001), the White Ant has just moved
on turn 39. The Black Pillbug may not move the White Ant on
turn 40. It can, however, move the White Ant on a later turn.
* Please see Section 10.1.5 – Pillbug Movement atop the Hive to see how the
Freedom to Move rule may restrict the Pillbug’s special ability.

Page 12

A

B
A

Figure 2.19

A

A

A

by Randy Ingersoll
And finally, a bug that is moved by a Pillbug is temporarily
paralyzed, unable to move or use its special ability.
The previous game continues in Figure 2.21. The Black
Pillbug picks up White Hopper #2 and moves it on turn 40.
Even though the White Hopper would love to jump into space
A and free White Ant #1, it cannot move. Because of this
temporary paralysis, the Black Pillbug can now pin the White
Hopper on turn 42. If a Pillbug is moved by the opposing
Pillbug, this paralysis also prohibits the just moved Pillbug
from using its special ability.
Interaction with Mosquito – When adjacent to a Pillbug, the
Mosquito acquires both the Pillbug’s movement and the
Pillbug’s special power. In Figure 2.22, from the
game U!HV-fabian-stepanzo-2013-06-23-0951, the White
Mosquito, using the adjacent Pillbug’s special ability, moves
Black Ant #1 as shown. This temporarily immobilizes the
Black Ant and frees the White Pillbug!

Chapter 2 – The Bugs
Figure 2.20
39 wA3 bP1/

Q

P
Figure 2.21
40 bP1:wG2 bP141 wP1:bS1 wP142 bP1 /wG2

Notation – An additional notation is required when the
Pillbug uses its special power. First the Pillbug is identified,
followed by the bug being moved, followed by the destination
space. The Pillbug and the bug being moved are separated by
a colon.* See the notation in Figure 2.21.
Strengths – The Pillbug has strengths both as a defender and
as an attacker. As a defender, the Pillbug can defend the
Queen by either moving it out of an almost surrounded
position (See Section 7.15.1 – Rescuing the Queen.) or
removing an attacking bug. (See Section 7.15.2 – Stripping an
Attacker.)
On the attack, a Pillbug can easily move a bug into an
otherwise inaccessible position. (See Section 7.15.9 – The
Direct Attack.)

39

B

A

Q

B

41

*This notation is different than that used on BoardSpace.

42

P
Figure 2.22
28 bP1 /bA3
29 wM1:bA1 wP1/

Due to its ability to move adjacent bugs, it is very difficult to
pin a Pillbug. A single bug will not do. (See Section 7.15.7 –
Double Pin.)
Weaknesses – With only a one space movement, the Pillbug
may require multiple turns to get into a favorable attacking or
defending position. Using only standard movement, the
Pillbug may get blocked by application of the Freedom to
Move rule. And finally, if the Pillbug becomes completely
surrounded, it may lose the opportunity to use its special
power. (See Section 7.15.4 – Surround the Pillbug.)

40

29
28

L

B

LMP

Page 13

Chapter 2 – The Bugs

Page 14

Play Hive® Like a Champion

by Randy Ingersoll

Chapter 3 – Notation

Chapter 3 – Notation
This notation convention is extracted from the web site:
www.BoardSpace.net. In addition to the move number*, a
move is notated by two bits of information. First is the
identification of the piece being moved or placed and second
is the target space of the piece. Accurate identification of the
target space requires two additional bits of information. First
is a reference piece adjacent to the target space and second is
an orientation to the reference piece.

3.1 – Piece Name

The pieces are designated by color (lower case ‘b’ or ‘w’),
letter, and number. The Queen, being unique, is designated by
color and letter only. The letter is based upon the piece name
in English: Queen, Ant, Grasshopper, Beetle, Spider,
Mosquito, and Ladybug. The number of the piece
corresponds to the order in which it was played. In the figures
in this book, pieces are identified with 1, 2, or 3 dots.

Figure 3.1
Piece Name Designations
1
4

In Figure 3.1 we see a typical game after each player has
placed three bugs. The bug designations are: Bug #1 is wQ;
Bug #2 is wS1; bug #3 is wG1; bug #4 is bG1; bug #5 is bG2;
and bug #6 is bQ. Note how the two Black Hoppers are
differentiated by the number of dots.

2

5

3
6

Note that on BoardSpace, the order of placement is
designated by geometric orientation. The first piece is played
oriented horizontally. The second piece played is oriented
from upper-left to lower-right; the third piece is played
oriented from upper-right to lower-left.

3.2 – Target Space - Reference Piece

The target space is identified by an adjacent piece (called the
reference piece) and an orientation to that reference piece. We
can see examples of reference pieces in Figure 3.2. If the next
White bug were to be placed in space A, space B, or space C,
White Spider #1 would be the reference piece for the move
notation. At the other end of the hive, Black Hopper #2 would

Figure 3.2
Target Space – Reference Piece

A

D

B

*In order to coincide with the numbering system used in the offline game review
system mentioned in Section 3.5, this book will not assign a move number to a
pass. This is slightly different than the numbering system used on BoardSpace
where a move number is assigned to a pass.

E
C

F

Page 15

Chapter 3 – Notation

Play Hive® Like a Champion

be the reference piece for a new Black bug placed in space D,
space E, or space F.

If a moving piece ends up next to more than one piece, then
any of those pieces may be the reference piece and therefore
there may be more than one way to identify the same move.
(Please see Section 3.4 – Sample Move Notation.)

3.3 – Target Space - Orientation

If the moving piece ends up to the left of the reference piece,
the orientation is placed before the reference piece
designation (i.e., to its left). If the moving piece ends up to the
right of the reference piece, the orientation is placed after the
reference piece designation (i.e., to its right). If a move is the
first move of the game or a ‘Beetle on top’ move, no
orientation is required.
Three symbols (/, \, -) are used to identify the relationship of
the moving piece to the reference piece. (In the following
discussion, please refer to Figure 3.3.) The forward slash (/)
designates the space above and to the right (space D) or below
and to the left (space C) of the reference piece. The dash (-)
designates the spaces immediately to the right (space E) or
immediately to the left (space B) of the reference piece. The
backward slash (\) designates the space above and to the left
(space A) or below and to the right (space F) of the reference
piece. One way of picturing the use of the slashes is to see
them as forming a line from the center of the reference piece
to the center of the moving piece.

Figure 3.3
Target Space – Orientation
\wS1
-wS1

A
B

/wS1

E
C

F

Please note, that to clearly identify orientation for Hive®
movement notation, pieces must always be placed ‘point
downward’ so that adjacent pieces are clearly either to its left
or to its right. This is how all the figures in this book are
oriented.
You will also notice that figures in this book that come from
actual games will be noted with S (Standard Hive®), M
(Mosquito), L (Ladybug), or LM (Ladybug & Mosquito).

3.4 – Sample Move Notation

Some notated moves are represented in Figure 3.4 through
Figure 3.7.

Figure 3.4 represents a basic Spider move. The White Spider
ends its move adjacent to only one piece, the Black Queen,
and therefore, there is only one possible notation for this
Page 16

Figure 3.4
wS1 bQ/

bG2/

D

A

bG2bG2\

by Randy Ingersoll
move.
Figure 3.5 shows a ‘Beetle on top’ move. Again, there is only
one possible notation for this move and it does not require an
orientation designation.

Chapter 3 – Notation
Figure 3.5
wB1 bQ

The placement of Black Spider #1 is notated in Figure 3.6.
Since the Black Spider ends its move adjacent to two bugs, an
alternate movement notation could be bS1 /bA1.

Two different moves are shown in Figure 3.7, one by White
Ant #2 and the other by White Hopper #2. Due to the
particular situations shown in this figure, there are multiple
possible notations for each of these moves. Note the alternate
movement notations. White Hopper #2 has three alternate
notations: wG2 -bQ or wG2 \bG1 or wG2 wG1/. White Ant
#2 also has three alternate notations: wA2 bQ- or wA2 bA1/
or wA2 \wA1.*

Figure 3.6
Placement of Black Spider
bS1 bG1\

3.5 – Online Play and Game Review

The web site www.BoardSpace.net is a great place to play
Hive®. You can play against ‘Dumbot,’ the site’s resident
computer program, or against other players from all around
the world. When getting started, you can log in as a ‘Guest.’
Then if you like what you see, there is no cost to register,
create your own online user name, and play.

Figure 3.7
wA2 wS1\
wG2 /wB1

Logging in takes you to the online lobby where you can see
what other players are logged in and what games that they are
playing. From the lobby you can pick and choose what room
you wish to be in and what you wish to do.
To review your own games or those of other players, all you
have to do is to pick a Review Room, choose Hive® as the
game of choice, and select a game to review. You can follow
along move by move, or at any time click the Edit button and
try different move combinations.

If you would like to review games without logging in to the
lobby, you can do so by going directly to the Hive® review
page at http://www.boardspace.net/hive/hive-viewer.shtml.

Another way to review games is to download the Hive® game
reviewer written by BoardSpace user Hlaspoor. This reviewer
allows you to copy SGF code from the BoardSpace review
*With the introduction of the Pillbug and its special ability to move another bug,
additional movement notation is required. Please see page 13.

Page 17

Chapter 3 – Notation

Play Hive® Like a Champion

page, store it in a Hive® Reviewer file, and replay and review
the game at your leisure. To download this free program you
may visit http://code.google.com/p/hive-game-reviewer/.*

3.6 – Standard Position

In order to simplify the review, comparison, and study of
Hive® openings, many of the games in this book have been
adjusted by rotation and/or reflection to be in Standard
Position. Whether a game is in Standard Position or not is
determined by the initial placement locations of Black’s first
bug and the two Queens.
In Standard Position, Black’s first move is a bug placement
immediately to the right of White’s first bug. If Black’s first
move is to any of the other five spaces, a rotation is required
to adjust the position.

Once the proper first move orientation has been achieved, the
initial placements of the two Queens are considered. First,
consider the placement of the White Queen in relation to the
horizontal axis formed by a line drawn through the first two
bugs placed. If the White Queen is initially placed above this
line, the game is considered to be in Standard Position. If the
White Queen’s initial placement is below this line, the game
must be reflected to achieve Standard Position.

If the White Queen is initially placed on this line, the initial
placement of the Black Queen is used to determine Standard
Position. If the Black Queen is placed above or on this line,
Standard Position has been achieved. If the Black Queen is
placed below this line, a reflection is required.

Figure 3.8
Not in Standard Position, before Rotation

S
Figure 3.9
In Standard Position, after Rotation

S
Figure 3.10
Not in Standard Position, before Reflection

Figure 3.8 shows the position after 8 turns in the game
HV-ringersoll-guest-2010-07-22-2044.
Figure 3.9 shows the same game after a rotation to place the
game in Standard Position.
Figure 3.10 shows the position after 8 turns in the game
U!HV-ringersoll-Eucalyx-2010-10-23-2212.

Figure 3.11 is the same game after a reflection puts the game
in Standard Position.

L
Figure 3.11
In Standard Position, after Reflection

As you can see, due to the nature of the hive’s hexagonal
pattern, rotation and/or reflection do not change the essential
nature of any position. But establishing Standard Position
greatly increases a Hive ® player’s ability to study and
compare opening positions.

*Each of the games used as examples in this book is available on BoardSpace or
as Hive® Reviewer Files.

Page 18

L

by Randy Ingersoll

Chapter 4 – Common Hive® Formations

Chapter 4 – Common Hive® Formations
The ability to recognize and identify common formations is
critical to the success of a Hive® player. The following will
briefly consider five of the more common formations that
regularly occur.

4.1 – Gate

A gate formation occurs when two tiles are separated by the
width of one side of a tile. A gate is easy to recognize as
opposite points of two tiles separated by a small gap. The gap
in a gate is too small for any piece to slide through, including
Beetles.

Figure 4.1.1
A Gate – Part 1

te

Ga

A

Please see Figure 4.1.1 where access to both space A and
space B is through a gate. White Ant #1 may not move into
space A. Black Ant #2 may not move into space B.

Also, two Beetles on top of the hive can form a gate which
prevents other Beetles from moving through it. Of course, the
Beetle, which cannot move directly through the gate, can
move on top of one of the pieces which form the gate. For
details regarding how a gate affects Beetle movement atop the
hive, see Chapter 10.1 – Bug Movement atop the Hive.

Figure 4.1.2
A Gate – Part 2
Ga

te

Ga

te

Ga

Gate

Recognizing potential gates is an important part of strategy, as
you may strive to create gates to render spaces inaccessible
around your Queen (Chapter 6.3 – The Block), while not
wanting them near your opponent’s Queen. A gate most often
needs five pieces surrounding a single, vacant space.
Thus spaces, or pockets, with an arc of four bugs surrounding
this vacant space can readily be used to form a gate through
the addition of another bug. Gates may also appear when two
lines of bugs approach each other as shown in Figure 4.1.2.
Interestingly, it this particular case, the two arms of the hive
create a series of four gates, each gate protecting access to not
only the space immediately behind it but also to the next gate.

B
Ga
te

te

Page 19

Chapter 4 – Common Hive® Formations

4.2 – Door

When two tiles are separated by the width of a whole tile, the
formation is referred to as a door. Any piece can slide through
a door. It is possible that a bug may gain extra mobility near
a door because while passing through a door, a Spider or
Queen, while maintaining contact with both pieces, may have
up to three choices of direction in which to continue.

Play Hive® Like a Champion

Figure 4.2.1
A Door

A1
B

In Figure 4.2.1 note that without the door formed by the
presence of Black Beetle #1, Black Spider #2 would only
have access to space A1 and space A2. The presence of the
Black Beetle, however, makes a door. Entering the door
extends the Black Spider’s possible movements to the two
spaces labeled B.

4.3 – Ring

A ring formation occurs when pieces connect to form a
continuous chain. A ring may consist of as few as six pieces,
or in some cases, many more. All the pieces in the ring that
are not limited by the standard movement rules potentially
become mobile.
In Figure 4.3.1 see how the ring increases the mobility of so
many bugs. All of the bugs are mobile except the White
Queen. (The placement of Black Beetle #1 keeps the White
Queen immobile.) Note also that the mobility of both White
Ant #2 and Black Spider #2 is limited because gates block
these bugs’ access to the outside of the hive. If either of these
bugs moves, it must stay inside the ring.
In most cases, forming a ring is not a good idea because it can
free opposing bugs to move. When one or more opposing
bugs are freed, it can have disastrous consequences. A more
thorough discussion of bad rings will be seen in Section 8.3 –
Beginners’ Mistakes – Making a Ring.
If only friendly pieces are freed by the formation of the ring,
however, it may be a very effective move (Chapter 7.6 –
Making a Ring). Offensively, friendly bugs released can be
used in an attack. Or defensively, a bug, typically a Hopper,
freed by the formation of the ring could escape, thus opening
a space adjacent to your Queen, or possibly even leaving an
escape route for your Queen.

Door

B

A2

Figure 4.3.1
A Ring

Figure 4.3.2
21 wA3 bA1\

21

A

S

Page 20

by Randy Ingersoll

Chapter 4 – Common Hive® Formations

To see an example of a ring from an actual game of standard
Hive® (U!HV-lucassus-ringersoll-2011-02-13-1932), look
first at Figures 4.3.2 (page 20). In this figure, White forms a
ring by moving Ant #3 into space A. Following this move,
five of the six bugs in the ring are free to move. Only White
Hopper #1 is unable to move. This is because doing so would
violate the One Hive rule by disconnecting Black Hopper #1
and the three bugs beyond it from the hive.

Note the response in Figure 4.3.3, leading to the position
diagramed in Figure 4.3.4. By moving Ant #1 to space B, not
only has Black broken the ring, but in the meantime he has
rendered both White Ant #2 and White Ant #3 immobile.

Note how, by application of the One Hive rule, all three of the
White Ants are now unable to move! Even though the White
Queen is now free to escape, the loss of the three most
powerful bugs will probably result in a quick loss for White.

Figure 4.3.3
22 bA1 -wA3

22

B

S
Figure 4.3.4

4.4 – Elbow

An elbow is formed when bugs are lined up in a string but the
string is not straight. Typically, only the bugs on either end of
a string are free to move. When an elbow forms, however, a
properly placed bug can free the bug on the outside of the
elbow. In Figure 4.4.1 for example, the White Queen cannot
move because doing so would violate the One Hive rule. But
by moving White Spider #1 to space A (into the elbow),
White provides an alternate connection between Black Spider
#1 and White Hopper #1 and the White Queen is now free to
move.

S
Figure 4.4.1
An Elbow

A

Defensively, an elbow can often block the approach of either
a Queen or a Spider. If the line of approach lands either of
these bugs in the inside of an elbow and an otherwise
immobile enemy bug occupies the outside of the elbow, the
enemy bug is not only free to move, but when doing so, it
traps the new arrival in the elbow instead, again due to the
One Hive rule.

As a real life example, let’s compare the next two figures on
page 22. The first, Figure 4.4.2, is from an actual game (HVcesc-ringersoll-2010-09-18-1309). The second, Figure 4.4.3,
is a ‘what if’ scenario showing the defensive value of an
elbow.

Page 21

Chapter 4 – Common Hive® Formations
In the first figure, it is easy to see that
Black is on the defensive. The Black
Queen is immobile and the only two
Black bugs that can legally move are
both tied up in defensive positions.
Black Spider #2 cannot move without
releasing White Spider #2 and possibly,
White Ant #3, to join the attack. Black
Ant #1 is relegated to just moving
back and forth, keeping White Ant #2
immobile.

Due to the stretched out nature of the
hive, however, this game may be headed
toward a draw. White does not seem to
have available the three additional bugs
needed to surround the Black Queen and
force a win. (See Chapter 7.1 – Counting
Bugs.)
White Hopper #1 is the key. White first
moves the Queen around the hive and
into position (space A) to allow White
Hopper #1 to move without mobilizing
Black Ant #3. Once Hopper #1 is
brought into play, White effectively uses
his Hoppers and Beetles to force a win.

Now compare Figure 4.4.3 in which
Black Hopper #3 and Black Ant #3 are
in an elbow position rather than inline.
As the White Queen approaches and
moves into space A, voilà, the Black
Hopper is free to move! When the Black
Hopper moves, the White Queen is left
immobile behind it. And the result is
probably going to be a draw.

Page 22

Play Hive® Like a Champion

Figure 4.4.2

G

A

S
Figure 4.4.3

A

G

S

by Randy Ingersoll

Chapter 4 – Common Hive® Formations

Figure 4.4.4
26 bG2 bA127 wS1 /bA3
28 bG2 /bA2

Figure 4.4.5
38 bB1 -bS2
26

A

28
38

A

Q

27

M

M

Another example showing the importance of understanding
elbows comes from U!HV-DrRaven-ringersoll-2011-02-150139. Figure 4.4.4 shows Black’s 26th and 28th moves where
a Hopper placement in the outside of an elbow, followed by a
hop into the inside of the elbow enabled Black Ant #1 to
move and be used elsewhere. Interestingly, some time later,
White missed the chance to duplicate the feat and release an
even more powerful bug.
In Figure 4.4.5 White could, by placing a Hopper in space A,
be in position to release the powerful White Mosquito. In the
end, White’s failure to release the Mosquito cost White the
game.

4.5 – Pocket

A pocket is a C-shaped, four bug formation. A closed pocket
has a fifth bug in the center, whereas an open pocket does not.
Figure 4.5.1, from the game HV-BlackMagic-ringersoll2010-11-25-1402, illustrates a closed pocket centered on the
Black Queen, while Figure 4.5.2 (page 24), from the game
HV-Faxiao-ringersoll-2010-09-18-1906, illustrates an open
pocket centered on space A.

Pockets regularly come into play in two basic ways. First,
forming a closed pocket will typically allow the bug in the

Figure 4.5.1
29 wM1 /bA2

29

LM

Page 23

Chapter 4 – Common Hive® Formations
center of the pocket to move. This is particularly important if
the bug in the pocket is the Queen. Forming a pocket around
the Queen will quite often allow her to escape. This, of
course, is a good thing if it is your Queen, but a bad thing if
it is your opponent’s Queen.
Secondly, moving a bug into an open pocket will quite often
give one or more bugs the ability to move away. If you can
control which bugs are freed by the formation of a pocket, it
could be a good trade in terms of bug count or bug quality.
If filling the pocket with one bug releases two of your own
bugs and both of those bugs can be placed in position to
attack, you could end up with a net gain of one attacker. Or, if
you can trade a Spider or even an Ant for a Beetle, and that
Beetle can then climb up and into a space that is not
accessible to the Spider or Ant, that too, can be a beneficial
trade.
Figure 4.5.3 and Figure 4.5.4 show an example (HVBlackMagic-ringersoll-2010-10-30-2043) in which a pocket
formation allows the Black Queen to escape and leads
directly to a victory for Black. By hopping out with Black
Hopper #1 on turn 32, Black forms a closed pocket around the
Black Queen and since no White bugs are available to keep
the Black Queen in place, the Black Queen escapes on
turn 34.

Play Hive® Like a Champion
Figure 4.5.2
15 wQ wG2-

A 15

S
Figure 4.5.3
32 bG1 wB1A

32

4.6 – Conclusion
In order to ‘Play Hive® Like a Champion’: one must
recognize the formations that affect bug movement,
understand the strengths and weaknesses of each,
learn to create the formations that improve your
position, and avoid the formations that harm your
position.

LM
Figure 4.5.4
33 wA3 wS134 bQ /wL1

34

33

LM

Page 24

by Randy Ingersoll

Chapter 5 – Strategy in the Hive

Chapter 5 – Strategy in the Hive
The basic strategy is obvious: attack your opponent’s
Queen while defending your own. How to do this,
however, may not be so obvious. This chapter discusses
the three keys to victory and then applies those keys, first,
to two important questions that arise during
the game. And finally, they are applied to the opening,
midgame, and endgame stages of a typical game of Hive®.

5.1 – Three Keys to Victory

A quote from a 19th century American Military General
sums up the basic strategy. This general was reported to
have said, “Get there first with the most.” This statement
highlights the three keys to successfully playing Hive®.
The three keys are: mobility, tempo, and strength; get
there (mobility) first (tempo) with the most (strength).
Mobility in Hive® means maintaining your bugs’ freedom
of movement. Due to the One Hive and Freedom
to Move rules, it is natural that bugs already in play and
situated on the inside of the hive begin to lose their
freedom to move. An immobile bug cannot be used for
attack or defense. The goal, therefore, should be to
control the outside of the hive, keeping your bugs mobile,
while limiting the mobility of the opposing bugs.

Figure 5.1, from the game HV-ringersoll-BlackMagic2010-11-04-2151, is a good example that contrasts good
mobility with poor mobility. This game will be more
thoroughly discussed in Chapter 8 – Beginners’ Mistakes.
Note how after turn 31, White has five mobile and
potentially mobile bugs (with four more in reserve),
while Black has only one (!) mobile bug other than the
Queen. Needless to say, this advantage in mobility led to
victory for White.
Tempo highlights the time aspect of Hive® and the
importance of not wasting moves. Many games are won
or lost by only one turn. Losing even a single tempo
could change a won game into a lost one, while gaining
just one tempo may salvage victory from the jaws of
defeat. Since bugs can only be placed adjacent to friendly
bugs, it typically takes at least two turns to get a bug into

Figure 5.1
31 wA3 bA3-

31

LM

Page 25

Chapter 5 – Strategy in the Hive
position. Choosing the exact space to play a bug can be
critical. The tempo lost by being forced to move a bug into a
better position can make the difference between winning and
losing.
Who will win the game (U!HV-diogocrist-ringersoll-201012-02-0150) depicted in Figure 5.2? Careful examination
reveals that both players are only two moves from winning.
White wins by moving Hopper #3 to space C, followed by
Beetle #1 to space D. Black wins by moving Hopper #3 to
space B, followed by the Ladybug to space A. Victory will go
to the side leading in tempo. In this particular game, Black,
with the move, won easily.
Strength refers to the number of bugs that are available for
both attack and defense. It takes six bugs to achieve a victory
by surrounding the opposing Queen. These bugs can be
friendly or opposing. Care must be taken to keep enough bugs
available to do the job. Offensively, if the number of bugs
available to attack is less than the number of vacant spaces
adjacent to the opposing Queen, you have a very serious
problem. If there is no way to free up additional bugs, you
may have no chance of winning whatsoever. Likewise, at the
point that you reduce the number of opposing bugs available
to attack to less than the number of vacant spaces adjacent
to your Queen, you have an excellent chance of victory.
If neither player has the strength necessary to produce a
victory, it is likely that the game will end in a draw.
Figure 5.3 shows a critical point in the game HV-DEIBYringersoll-2011-06-12-1139 where White no longer has the
strength to force a victory. With three spots to fill, only two
bugs in reserve, and no prospect to free an additional bug,
White has no chance. It is not surprising then, that this game
was lost in 18 more moves.
Understand these three keys: Mobility, Tempo, and
Strength, and you will open many doors to victory.

5.2 – Attack or Defend

In an American country western song it is said that one must
“know when to hold ‘em and know when to fold ‘em.”
Translated into the game of Hive®, the question becomes:
Page 26

Play Hive® Like a Champion
Figure 5.2
Which side is on the move? Who will win?

A
B

C
D
A

L
Figure 5.3
25 wB1 wA2\
26 bA3 /wB1
25

26

S

by Randy Ingersoll

Chapter 5 – Strategy in the Hive

“Shall I attack or shall I defend?” Knowing when to attack
and when to defend is critical to becoming a true Hive®
champion.

In a typical game between players of equal ability, White,
having the first move, will start on the attack. If Black can
withstand this initial onslaught, there will come a point in the
game when the momentum will shift. When this occurs,
Black’s counter attack will begin.

The critical point when the momentum shifts may not be as
obvious as it may seem. The game HV-Eucalyx-ringersoll2011-03-26-1103, in Figure 5.4, demonstrates this. In this
game, Black is on the defensive, fighting hard to stop White’s
assault. Seemingly making an illogical move, Black releases
the pin (Section 6.1.3 – The Pin – Releasing a Pin) on White
Beetle #1. This may, at first glance, give White the victory,
but having carefully examined the situation, Black realized
that now was the perfect time to start the counter attack. In
Section 7.4.3 – Counter Attack with Tempo, the continuation
of this game will show the ultimate result of Black knowing
when to begin the attack.
Knowing when to attack and when to defend is
critical to becoming a Hive® Master. Accurately
identifying the turning point, when switching from
defense to attack and vice versa, will enable your
victories to pile up.

Figure 5.4
19 wM1 wA120 bA2 wM1/

20

19

LM

5.3 – Place or Play

The three keys to victory are almost never to be considered in
a vacuum. Each of the three must be examined in light of the
other two. Nowhere is this better demonstrated than in the
decision that must be made when answering the question:
“Place or play?” Placing a new bug carries with it an increase
in strength but also a potential loss of tempo.
This delicate balance between placing new bugs and moving
existing bugs helps make this game so enjoyable. Place too
many and you may run out of bugs to place in the endgame.
Place too few and you may get overwhelmed by a superior
force before your bugs have even entered the game.

Page 27

Chapter 5 – Strategy in the Hive
The side on the attack typically places more bugs. It is not
unusual for White to have eight or nine bugs placed while
Black still has only placed five or six. In Figure 5.5, from the
game HV-BlackMagic-ringersoll-2010-10-30-2103, White is
on the attack and has placed all 13 bugs. Black, on the other
hand, is defending and has only placed nine bugs. Black has
been forced to react, moving bugs to successfully defend the
Queen.
Tempo is critical when making this place or play decision.
An early loss of tempo by an attacker may allow the defender
to seize the initiative. A wasted move by the defender could
result in a lost tempo and a quick loss. All moves by the
Queen must be carefully weighed. This is particularly
important in the opening. The defensibility of the new
location must be carefully compared to that of the old
location. Is it worth the loss of a tempo? Is there a balancing
gain in mobility or strength?
“To place or not to place, that is the question.”
If Shakespeare’s Hamlet had played the game, he
might have asked this question. Apply the three keys
to this question and you will not have to “suffer the
slings and arrows of outrageous fortune.”

5.4 – Strategy and Bugs in the Hive

Each of the bugs in the hive has its strengths and weaknesses.
Understanding the strategic implications of each will allow a
Hive® player to play up to the maximum potential.

Bugs can be grouped into two basic categories: those that are
limited to standard movement and cannot go up and over
other bugs to reach an interior space and those that have
special movement and can reach an interior space. The Queen,
Ant, and Spider are in the first category. The Beetle, Hopper,
Mosquito, and Ladybug fall into the second category.
The Ant is the most mobile bug in the hive. Its unlimited
range gives it the ability to attack or defend anywhere around
the outside of the hive. It is very important to keep the Ants
mobile and available to respond to whatever circumstances
are presented. Even with its superior movement, the Ant
cannot get to every open space in the hive. The Freedom to
Move rule will keep an Ant out of interior spaces as
Page 28

Play Hive® Like a Champion
Figure 5.5
43 wS2 wG2/
44 bM1 wS244

Q

B

43

LM

by Randy Ingersoll
demonstrated in Figure 5.6 (from the game U!HV-cheeweeringersoll-2011-02-17-0147). Black Ant #2 is mobile, but the
gate protecting space A keeps it from winning the game.

Most players agree that the Spider is the weakest bug in the
hive. But this does not mean that the Spider is useless. Early
in the game, when the hive is still small, a Spider can quickly
reach a nearby space. Late in the game, a properly placed
Spider can be used both offensively and defensively (Chapter
7.11 – Using Your Spiders).
The bugs in the second category, those that can reach interior
spaces, are very important. One must strategically plan to
keep enough of these bugs on hand to reach interior spaces
that may be blocked to the Ant and Spider (Chapter 6.3 – The
Block). Looking back at Figure 5.6, we see that with proper
strategic planning Black was able to bring in a Hopper to
space B in order to attack space A. If none of these second
category bugs were available, this space could not be filled
and Black’s game prospects would be dim.

Chapter 5 – Strategy in the Hive
Figure 5.6
33 wB2 wS1
33

B

Ga
te

S

A

A

LM

Consideration of tempo must also be taken with these second
category bugs. The long range ability of a Hopper may allow
it to jump into a distant space. The limited range of the
Ladybug will require a closer placement, while the slow
speed of a Beetle may require many moves to get into
position to attack.
Strategy varies from bug to bug. Learn the strengths
and weaknesses of each and you will be able to use
them properly to count up victories.

5.5 – Opening Strategy for White

With the first move, White has the advantage of being the
aggressor in the opening. To gain the most benefit from this
inherent advantage, White must do three things. First, White
must play the Queen early. Waiting until the fourth turn to
play the Queen can seriously limit White’s early mobility and
jeopardize the outcome of the game.

Second, White must play aggressively. The first turn does not
automatically create an advantage. White must attack early to
do so. And third, White must immobilize the Black Queen as
quickly as possible. Failure to immobilize the opposing
Queen may allow Black to easily stop the White attack.
The quickest way to immobilize the opposing Queen is via a
Page 29

Chapter 5 – Strategy in the Hive
pin (Chapter 6 – The Pin). If, however, the opposing Queen is
on the far reaches of the hive and cannot improve her position
by moving, she is, in effect, immobile. In this case, time can
be invested in bringing in new bugs rather than moving
existing bugs into an attacking position.

Play Hive® Like a Champion
Figure 5.7
9 wS2 bQ/
9

Figure 5.7 shows an opening position from the game HVringersoll-Fumanchu-2010-09-23-1050 in which White has
quickly accomplished all three opening goals. Notice how on
turn nine, White pins the Black Queen.

S

Attack! Attack! Attack! To take full advantage of the
tempo gained by having the first turn, White must
attack quickly and decisively.

5.6 – Opening Strategy for Black

Moving second is a definite disadvantage for Black, but it
does not have to be a fatal disadvantage. Black can, by
applying three basic opening strategies, play a good game and
possibly pull off a victory. Like White, Black must get the
Queen played early. Games cannot be won in the opening, but
they can definitely be lost in the opening. And one of the
quickest ways to lose in the opening is to fail to get the Queen
into play early.
The second opening strategy for Black is to set up a good
defensive position. Just like Hoppers, Beetles, Ladybugs, and
Mosquito can jump into surrounded spaces, they can also
jump out. Keeping one or two of these bugs adjacent to the
Queen may allow a properly timed exodus to thwart White’s
attack, start a counter attack, and possibly gain a victory.
A more thorough discussion of this is in Chapter 7.2 –
Defending Your Queen.

And finally, it is important for Black to get Ants into play
quickly. As the best defenders, Ants can quickly scurry about
the hive immobilizing opposing bugs and defending against
impending attacks. The game HV-ringersoll-Fumanchu2010-11-21-1420, in Figure 5.8, shows this exceptionally
well. Notice how Black has two defending bugs adjacent to
the Queen (a Ladybug and a Mosquito) and two of the three
Ants are already in the hive. In addition, both Ants are mobile
and being used beneficially (in this case pinning two valuable
bugs).
Page 30

Figure 5.8
14 bA2 -wM1

14

LM

by Randy Ingersoll

Chapter 5 – Strategy in the Hive

An interesting side note here is that the type of opening
played (Chapter 9.0 – Opening Theory) is usually decided by
the player who places the Queen second. Since compact
games with many bugs clustered together generally favor the
attacker, many defenders set the goal to play an opening that
results in the two Queens being in close proximity, or work to
spread the game out by forming extended lines of single bugs.
In either of these cases, Black may more easily play for a
draw. For more on this subject, please see Chapter 7.7 –
Playing for a Draw.
To win consistently with Black, it is important to set
up a good defense. Use good defenders next to your
Queen and get your Ants in play quickly.

5.7 – Midgame Strategy

It has been mentioned that games cannot be won in the
opening, but they can be lost. This is not the case in the
midgame. Using good strategy and applying the tactics that
will be discussed later in this book, many players will be able
to force victory in the midgame.

Balancing the three keys to victory is nowhere more
important than in this stage of the game. Mobility is probably
the most important key. Mobility allows a player to make the
best use of the force of bugs at his disposal. Mobile Ants,
particularly, can be used to pin (Chapter 6.1 – The Pin)
opposing bugs. These properly placed pins can reduce the
opposing strength and mobility while maintaining one’s own.
Understanding tempo is vital for knowing when to attack.
Figure 5.9 shows a midgame position from the game U!HVbird-ringersoll-2010-12-12-2109 in which proper counting of
tempo allowed White to begin an unstoppable attack. More
about this game will be discussed in Chapter 7.4 – Counter
Attack.
The majority of games end in the midgame. But sometimes,
neither player can force victory in the midgame and the game
transitions into an endgame. Throughout the midgame it is
important to plan ahead for the possibility of an endgame.
Keeping the proper bugs available for late game placement is
vital. Don’t bring in a new bug unless one can be assured that
it will perform a useful purpose.

Figure 5.9
30 bG1 -bA3
30

A

LM

Page 31

Chapter 5 – Strategy in the Hive

Play Hive® Like a Champion

More games are won and lost in the midgame than
any other time. Learn to apply the three keys during
this critical time and you will win.

5.8 – Endgame Strategy

A game of Hive® is considered in the endgame when all, or
almost all, of the bugs from each side have been placed.
At this time, the most important consideration is strength.
To force a victory, a player must have enough bugs available
to surround the opposing Queen.
Not only must the number of bugs be considered, but the type
of bugs must also be considered. As mentioned earlier,
blocked spaces can only be reached by Beetles, Hoppers,
Mosquitoes, and Ladybugs. Care must be taken when playing
these bugs early. The failure to keep enough of these bugs in
reserve can easily cost a victory.

Mobility is the second consideration. With all of the bugs
played into the hive, the question becomes: “Which bugs are
mobile?”

A good example of an endgame position is shown in
Figure 5.10 from the game HV-humdeabril-ringersoll-201012-24-0303. Here Black forces a victory because a 2-for-1
Fill (Section 6.4.3) allows Beetle #2 to be released. The
Beetle atop the hive working together with Black Hopper #1,
well positioned to jump into an attacking position in space C,
forces a victory.
Bug count is the most critical key in the endgame.
Make sure that you have enough bugs to gain your
well deserved victory!

5.9 – Conclusion
Learning the basic strategy to playing Hive® will
allow a new player to quickly progress from newbie
to apprentice to master. Learn well these strategies
and the tactics that follow and you will soon be
playing Hive® like a champion!
Page 32

Figure 5.10
74 bG2 bQ/
75 wS2 bA1\
76 bG3 bB2/
A

B

C
74
M

Q

76

B

C
75

M

by Randy Ingersoll

Chapter 6.1 – The Pin

Chapter 6.1 – The Pin
One of the first tactics that a new Hive® player learns is The
Pin. There are many circumstances when an enemy bug can
be easily rendered immobile by proper application of the One
Hive rule. This is accomplished by moving one of your
friendly bugs and placing it adjacent to the enemy bug.
If moving the enemy bug would disconnect your newly
moved bug from the hive, then the enemy bug cannot move.
But, there is more to the pin then first meets the eye.
Situations occur when a pin can be replaced or sometimes
even released.

Not all pins are created equal so initial pin placements can be
critical. A real Hive® Master recognizes the subtle differences
in pin placement and plans ahead in order to most efficiently
apply, not just this basic tactic, but the other interrelated
tactics that will be discussed and learned later.

6.1.1 – Placing a Pin

The first examination must be the pin itself and how a pin is
placed. In Figure 6.1.1, from the game U!HV-ringersollpirtscire-2010-10-23-1630, White Ant #1 pins Black Ant #1
by moving as shown. Notice how that after this move by the
White Ant, the Black Ant cannot move without disconnecting
the White Ant from the hive and thus breaking the One Hive
rule. The White Ant could just as easily move into space A
and accomplished the same results. But now, compare
space B. If the White Ant were moved into space B, either the
Black Ant or the Black Queen could move without violating
the One Hive rule. This example demonstrates the basic pin,
around which much of the game of Hive® pivots.

This tactic is particularly powerful when used against the
enemy Queen. By rendering the Queen immobile, it is much
easier to plan and execute an attack. Figure 6.1.2, from the
game U!HV-diogocrist-ringersoll-2010-12-02-0150, is very
similar to Figure 6.1.1 except for the fact that White Ant #1
is now pinning the Black Queen. The same comments
regarding space A and space B in Figure 6.1.1 also apply to
the situation in this second figure.

Figure 6.1.1
7 wA1 bA1/

7

A
B

L
Figure 6.1.2
7 wA1 bQ\

B

7

A

L

Page 33

Chapter 6.1 – The Pin
In other cases, a powerful bug like an Ant or Beetle can be
pinned by a less powerful bug. Spiders are particularly useful
in the opening when fewer movement or placement options
are available to your opponent. Note that Figure 6.1.3, from
the game HV-ringersoll-albedo-2010-08-22-2137, is similar
to the two previous examples. There is a tremendous
difference, however. In this case a less powerful piece
(Spider) pins a more powerful piece (Ant). This example also
highlights the difference in movement ability between the
Spider and the Ant. The White Ant in Figure 6.1.2 (page 33)
has a choice. It can place the pin in either of two spaces. With
its limited movement the White Spider in Figure 6.1.3 does
not have a choice; it must place the pin as shown.
You may be able to use a single bug to pin more than one
opposing bug. In Figure 6.1.4, from the game U!HV-Eucalyxringersoll-2010-08-29-1321, White has just placed a pin with
Ant #1. This is a double pin, pinning both Black Ant #2 and
Black Spider #1. Not only does this double pin keep White
Ant #1 mobile and free to be used elsewhere at the proper
time, but it provides a net gain in strength available to attack.
This is a good time to introduce another concept that is
important in understanding the pin. The pin placed in
Figure 6.1.4 will be referred to as an elbow pin. This is
because the final position of the bug being pinned is inside an
elbow (Section 4.4). If on the other hand, the White Ant had
been placed in space A, the pin would be an inline pin because
the pinning bug and the pinned bug are connected in a straight
line.
Remembering the three important concepts:
Strength, Mobility, and Tempo, the pin is a very
good way to reduce your opponent’s Mobility and
available Strength.

6.1.2 – Replacing a Pin

Due to their mobility, Ants are the most common bug used to
place a pin. The disadvantage with having an Ant pinning
another piece is that the Ant, while being used as a pin, is
unable to be used elsewhere. (If the Ant moves, the opposing,
previously pinned piece, will be released.)

Page 34

Play Hive® Like a Champion
Figure 6.1.3
7 wS1 bA1\

7

S

Figure 6.1.4
13 wA1 bA2/

A

13

S

by Randy Ingersoll
There is however a tactic that can be used to free a bug
(particularly an Ant) that is being used to pin an opposing
bug. A Hopper, Spider, Beetle, or Ladybug can be placed so
that its next move also pins the enemy bug, thus releasing the
previously pinning bug for more important use elsewhere.

Chapter 6.1 – The Pin
Figure 6.1.5
19 wG2 wA120 bG3 bA1\
21 wG2 -wA1
21

Continuing with the game U!HV-Eucalyx-ringersoll-201008-29-1321, just used in the previous section, we arrive at
Figure 6.1.5. This demonstrates a classic Hopper pin
replacement. With turns 19 and 20, both players are
positioning themselves for pin replacements. Unfortunately
for Black, the White pin replacement is completed first and
when the White Ant is released it immediately moves to space
A and pins Black Ant #1.

19

A

In this example both players were using Hoppers to perform
the pin replacement, but a Spider will do the job just as well.
The next example shows a not so classic pin replacement
performed by a Spider.
Figure 6.1.6 shows this not so classic Spider pin replacement
from the game U!HV-Eucalyx-ringersoll-2010-08-30-2234.
Black Spider #2 enters the game on turn 26 and then on
turn 28 performs the pin replacement by moving to
space A.

It is important, of course, to take care to make sure that the
new bug is placed in such a way that it can move to its
intended target space. But that is not the only consideration.
With a classic pin replacement there may also be a danger that
an enemy bug can pin both your new bug and the original
pinning bug. And finally, this tactic takes two moves so you
must be sure that your gain by freeing your bug offsets the
loss of tempo. For this last reason, this tactic does not usually
occur in the early stages of a game when tempo is vitally
important.
Be on the lookout for opportunities to replace pins
and free valuable Ants for use elsewhere in the hive.

20

S
Figure 6.1.6
26 bS2 bA227 wA3 -wS2
28 bS2 bA3-

Q

26

28
27

A

S

Page 35

Chapter 6.1 – The Pin

6.1.3 – Releasing a Pin

When an important bug is pinned, a player can be at a severe
disadvantage. Therefore, a good player is always looking for
situations which allow the pin to be released. A pinned bug in
an elbow demonstrates how this can be done.

Play Hive® Like a Champion

Figure 6.1.7
26 bG2 bA127 wS1 /bA3
28 bG2 /bA2

26

In the game U!HV-DrRaven-ringersoll-2011-02-15-0139,
shown in Figure 6.1.7, Black places a Hopper on turn 26 and
then on turn 28 the Hopper jumps into space A, inside the
elbow. This releases the pin on Black Ant #1 and in this case
is a good trade for Black since the Ant will be a better
defender than the Hopper.

A

Figure 6.1.8 demonstrates another pin release, this time by
way of a Spider. This specific example is from the game HVddyer-ringersoll-2010-09-18-0032. As Black Spider #1
moves into the inside of the elbow, Black Ant #1 is released
from the outside of the elbow. And again, the more valuable
Ant has been released and the less valuable Spider has been
left behind.
Releasing a pin on an important bug can improve
your situation. Watch for these chances.

28

27

M
Figure 6.1.8
16 bS1 wA1/

6.1.4 – Choosing Pin Placement

Not all pins are created equal. When using an Ant to place a
pin you will probably have a choice of exact pin placement.
The individual circumstances will help you decide where the
best placement location is. Here are some questions to ask and
answer before making your final decision:

Are there any enemy bugs that can immediately release your
pin? If there are, you may want to consider not spending the
tempo to initialize the pin.
Are there any enemy bugs that can subsequently repin your
bug as well? Particularly dangerous is a Hopper inside the
hive in position to hop out. If the Hopper is adjacent to your
Queen and hopping out would not release your Queen, then
the Hopper would not only pin your bug, but also continue to
threaten your Queen.

Do you have bugs in reserve? If so, and later you need to
execute a pin replacement, would the inline pin or elbow pin
give you the best position after the execution of the pin
replacement?
Page 36

16

S

by Randy Ingersoll
Are there pin positions that would block access to either your
Queen or the enemy Queen? (See Chapter 6.3 – The Block.)
If you do not have Beetles or Hoppers available, be very
careful if your pin would block access to the enemy Queen.
If your opponent does not have Beetles or Hoppers available,
then blocking access to your Queen will provide protection in
the endgame.

If your opponent has bugs in reserve, which spaces are
available for new bug placement after your pin? In many
cases, if your initial pin is an elbow pin and your opponent
places a new bug adjacent to the pinned bug, you can then
immediately move your bug to pin the newly placed bug and
the originally pinned bug.

The foregoing gives some examples of the things to look for
when deciding where to place a pin. With experience and the
ability to look two, three, or more turns ahead, your pin
placements will continue to improve. Conversely, this insight
will help you prepare for and respond to pins placed by your
opponent.
Now we are going to follow along in the game U!HVEucalyx-ringersoll-2010-12-09-1213 and see how pin
placement affected the results. In Figure 6.1.9 White has
just played Spider #2. If Black doesn’t pin the Spider
immediately, it will move toward the two Black Ants, pinning
one of them. In order to keep Black Hopper #1 mobile, Black
chooses to pin with Ant #2. Which space does he choose?
If Black is concerned about a new bug placement in space C,
then Black will place the pin from space A. But if Black
chooses to pin from space A, then when Black attacks by
moving a bug into space C the pin on the White Spider will
be released. On the other hand, if White elects to pin from
space B, then space C will be left available for new White bug
placement. Deciding that controlling White bug placement
was more important, Black chose space A. Later we will see
the consequences of this choice by Black.

Chapter 6.1 – The Pin
Figure 6.1.9
15 wS2 wQ\
16 bA2 ???

C
15

A

B

16

LM
Figure 6.1.10
17 wA2 \wS1
18 bA1 ???

B
A
17

C
D

E

18

LM

White continued by bringing in Ant #2 as seen in
Figure 6.1.10. Black elected to pin with Ant #1. But where
should the pin be placed? The inline pin from space B
minimizes the opportunity later for a pin release into an elbow
and restricts White new bug placement in spaces A and C.
But it does allow a new bug placement into space D.

Page 37

Chapter 6.1 – The Pin
The elbow pin into space C might allow a later pin release,
but it has the advantage of restricting new White bug
placement into space D. If a new bug is placed in space A,
then the Black Ant could shift the pin and three White
bugs would be pinned by just the one Black Ant.
However, if a new bug is placed in space A and pinned by
Black Ant #2, a White Bug moved into space E would free
two White bugs.

Play Hive® Like a Champion
Figure 6.1.11
25 wG3 wA3-

There is much more to consider when placing a pin than
might first meet the eye. In actual play, Black chose the
inline placement in space B.

The game has progressed and in Figure 6.1.11, White is
preparing for a pin replacement with Hopper #3. With the
actual placement of Black Ant #2, White can successfully
execute the pin replacement and free Ant #3. But if Black
Ant #2 had been placed in space B instead of its actual
location, the pin replacement attempt would have resulted
in a ring (Section 4.3 – Ring) and Black could respond in
such a way that the White Ant would still be pinned.
Note that the placement of the pin by Black Ant #2 on turn
16 has an effect nine moves later on the outcome of the
game.

25

B

A

LM
Figure 6.1.12
31 wM1 wS1/

C

31

A

And finally, Figure 6.1.12 shows the entrance of
the White Mosquito on turn 31. The White Mosquito
enters the game adjacent to White Ant #2 and therefore
immediately has the Ant’s superior mobility. Black can
choose to keep the pin on White Ant #2 or shift the pin to
the White Mosquito. Either way, one or the other of the
White bugs will be mobile.
But if Black had placed the pin from space C, the White
Mosquito could not have entered the game in the space
shown. And if it had entered the game in space A, the
Black Ant could shift the pin to the Mosquito and both the
White Mosquito and White Ant #2 would have been
pinned by the one Black Ant!
An expert player takes time to carefully choose
his pin placements. If you do the same, then you
will soon be an expert.

Page 38

LM

by Randy Ingersoll

6.1.5 – The Bidirectional Pin

The concept of the bidirectional pin can be introduced in
Figure 6.1.13, from the game HV-seneca29-ringersoll-201109-17-1536. Black Hopper #2 is the focus of the bidirectional
pin. Notice how this bug is pinned from two different
directions. From the upper left, the Hopper is pinned by Black
Spider #2 and the bugs beyond it. From the right, it is pinned
by Black Hopper #3 and the White Spider beyond it. This
bidirectional pin is critical because Black Hopper #2 is in a
defensive position adjacent to the Black Queen.

If it were only singly pinned, it would be free to move as soon
as either space A or space B was filled. By vacating a space
next to the Queen, Black would not be lost. But due to the
bidirectional pin, White’s attack will succeed before the Black
Hopper has a chance to escape.
In some cases a second pin will be redundant and
unnecessary. But when on the attack, watch for
opportunities to keep an opposing defender in place
by using this excellent tactic.

Chapter 6.1 – The Pin

Figure 6.1.13
41 wS1 bG3-

Q

A
B

41

S

6.1.6 – Conclusion
The concept of The Pin is a basic one that beginning
Hive® players learn very early. But as you can see,
there are nuances to the basic pin that will only be
learned by trial and error, experience, and study.

Page 39

Chapter 6.1 – The Pin

Page 40

Play Hive® Like a Champion

by Randy Ingersoll

Chapter 6.2 – The Cover

Chapter 6.2 – The Cover
Despite its slow moving ability, a Beetle is a very powerful
bug. The power of the Beetle comes from its ability to climb
atop the hive. (See Section 2.2 – Beetle.)

Part of the Beetle’s power comes from the fact that climbing
atop the hive allows a Beetle to reach an interior space that is
inaccessible to bugs that move in a standard manner. But a
large portion of the Beetle’s power comes from what we will
refer to as The Cover. The Beetle Cover refers to its ability to
cover an opposing bug and render it immobile. Not only is an
opposing bug covered in this manner unable to move, but for
new bug placement purposes, the color of that space is
changed to the color of the topmost Beetle.

6.2.1 – Immobilize the Queen

The Beetle Cover is a particularly dangerous weapon when
the bug covered is the opposing Queen. Because she cannot
escape, it is now much easier to surround the Queen.

Figure 6.2.1
26 bA3 wS2/
27 wB1 bQ

Let’s look at HV-lukiejro-ringersoll-2010-07-29-2049, a
game in which the immobilization of Black’s Queen leads to
a well earned victory for White. Figure 6.2.1 shows turns 26
and 27. The Black Ant pins the two White bugs at the farthest
reach of the hive and then White Beetle #1 covers the Black
Queen.
The Black Queen can not escape.

A Beetle cover is an excellent way to immobilize your
opponent’s Queen, render her escape impossible, and
thus prepare for the final attack.

26

S

27

6.2.2 – Direct Drop

When the Queen is covered, it is quite likely that new bugs
will be able to be placed directly adjacent to the Queen! This
is called a Direct Drop and is a very serious threat. Typically
speaking, a new bug takes at least two turns to attack the
Queen. On the first turn the new bug is placed and on the
second turn it is moved into position against the
opposing Queen. But when a Queen is covered and new bugs
can be dropped in adjacent spaces, a tempo is gained by each

S

Page 41

Chapter 6.2 – The Cover
bug dropped immediately adjacent to the Queen. Realizing
that many games are won or lost by only one tempo, it is easy
to see the value of a Beetle cover of the enemy Queen.

Play Hive® Like a Champion
Figure 6.2.2
34 bA2 /wB1
35 wB1 bA2

Now let’s examine Figure 6.2.2, a continuation of the game
HV-lukiejro-ringersoll-2010-07-29-2049 from the previous
section. Here, as in the previous figure, the Black Queen is
covered. Of the five empty spaces around the Queen only two
of them have adjacent Black bugs. Spaces A, B, and C are all
out of touch with any Black bugs and are, therefore, in danger
of direct drop placement of new White bugs.

This threat virtually forces Black to respond as shown in turn
34. Of course, White shifts the Beetle Cover to the newly
moved Black Ant. This cover of the Black Ant has a triply
negative effect on Black’s game. The Black Queen remains
pinned. The Black Ant is now permanently removed from
play. And by moving away, the Black Ant has released the pin
on White Ant #1. This Ant is now free to join the attack or to
be used for defense.
Another game in which a Beetle cover is used very effectively
is HV-ringersoll-Fumanchu-2011-02-18-1224. Figure 6.2.3
shows turn 22. Black brings in Beetle #2 to begin an assault
on the White Queen.

A

Q

B

35

C

34

S
Figure 6.2.3
22 bB2 /bG1

Five turns later, Figure 6.2.4 (page 43) shows White’s vain
attempt to defend. Notice how the Beetle Cover opens up both
space A and space B for direct bug placement adjacent to the
White Queen! Even though White has two Hoppers that can
hop out and vacate spaces around the Queen, White has no
chance.
On turns 28 and 30, Black brings in two bugs and White is
defenseless, resigning on turn 31 (Figure 6.2.5 on page 43).
Note, too, that when White Hopper #2 jumps out, space A is
opened up for a direct bug placement next to the Queen.
All in all, this game is an excellent example of how
the Beetle Cover can lead to a devastating attack.

Page 42

22

S

by Randy Ingersoll

Chapter 6.2 – The Cover

Figure 6.2.4
27 wG2 wG1/

Figure 6.2.5
28 bS1 -bB2
29 wG1 /bS1
30 bS2 bS1/
31 White Resigns

30

A
B

Q

28
27
Q

29 A

S

S

6.2.3 – Beetle Pin Replacement

The third aspect of the Beetle Cover is the Beetle as a Pin
Replacement. This will be demonstrated in the game HVlukiejro-ringersoll-2010-07-29-2049, which was also used in
the earlier discussion regarding immobilizing the Queen.
In the moves leading up to Figure 6.2.6, White has forced
Black into an unfavorable ring. On turn 47, White Ant #3
breaks the ring and pins Black Ant #3. Black cannot gain the
elusive victory, even though he is only one turn away. There
are no Black bugs available to complete the victory.

Figure 6.2.6
47 wA3 bA3/

47

White has as much time as needed for Beetle #2 to climb atop
the hive and move in to cover Black Ant #3. As soon as this
occurs, White Ant #3 is relieved of the pinning duty and is
free to move about and attack the Black Queen.
Although in this case it was not necessary, please notice that
after the Beetle Cover of Black Ant #3, a new bug could be
dropped into a pinning position on this Black Ant. And then
the White Beetle would also be free to move its way across
the hive and join the attack.

A

S

Page 43

Chapter 6.2 – The Cover
Figure 6.2.7 shows the game some sixteen moves later. White
Beetle #2 has covered Black Ant #3, White Ant #3 has joined
the attack, and Black is just a few moves away from certain
defeat.

With no productive way to either complete the victory or
defend the oncoming White onslaught, Black stands by
helplessly and can only making time wasting moves. White,
meanwhile, attacks with Ant #3 and Hopper #2, and then
brings in the final Hopper, jumps into space A, and wins
easily when White Beetle #1 comes down from atop the hive
into space B.

Play Hive® Like a Champion
Figure 6.2.7
63 wG3 \wG2

A

This game shows another victory produced in large
part by the Beetle Cover.

A
B

6.2.4 – Covering a Defender

The final aspect of the Beetle Cover applies to bugs
defending the Queen. By moving out at an opportune
moment, a defending bug can vacate a space adjacent to
the friendly Queen. (See Chapter 7.2 – Defending the Queen.)
If properly positioned, the same bug can be used to pin an
attacking bug, block access to a vital space, or actually attack
the opposing Queen. By covering a defending bug, a Beetle
can prevent this exodus from happening while simultaneously
staying in position to complete the encirclement of the
opposing Queen and, thereby, bring victory.
A good example of this is the following game, HVhumdeabril-ringersoll-2010-11-29-0410. In Figure 6.2.8 we
see that Black is on the attack, already having successfully
executed a cover of the White Queen, this time by a Mosquito
moving like a Beetle. But White has three well placed
defenders. Hopper #1, Hopper #3, and Beetle #2 are all in
position to move out if given the right opportunity. On turn
48, Black elects to shift the cover from the Queen to the
defending Beetle. This Mosquito move serves multiple
purposes. It keeps the White Beetle from vacating an
important space adjacent to the White Queen. It stops the
Beetle from defending by covering a Black attacker. And it
keeps the Black Mosquito within striking range of other
spaces adjacent to the White Queen.

Page 44

63
A

S
Figure 6.2.8
48 bM1 wB2

48
Q

LM

by Randy Ingersoll
In Figure 6.2.9 we see a second Beetle attacker approach and
cover White Hopper #1. These two covers are vital to the
success of Black’s attack. Without the cover, White Hopper
#1 would be free to move as soon as space B is occupied. But
with the cover, Black can occupy space B without any
negative consequences. The same is true with spaces A and C.
In this figure there is a ring (Section 4.3) that would allow the
White Beetle to move if it were not for the Black Mosquito
cover. Soon, White Ant #1 will break the ring and move on to
better uses elsewhere. (See the pin in Figure 6.2.10.)

Chapter 6.2 – The Cover
Figure 6.2.9
52 bB2 wG1

A
B

B

With the ring broken, however, the White Beetle would still
be able to move as soon as either space A or space C is
occupied.
But with the two covers (one by Beetle #2 and the other by
the Mosquito) keeping the White defenders in place, we see
in Figure 6.2.10, Black safely moving in. In this figure, Black
Ant #2 has already moved into space B, on turn 60, the
Ladybug moves into space C, and finally, on the next move,
one of the Black bugs will complete the victory with a move
into space A.

C

G

52

LM
Figure 6.2.10
60 bL1 wM1/

This game has shown an excellent win for Black,
proving again the power of the Beetle, in this case
covering a defender.

G

A

6.2.5 – Conclusion
The Cover is a very powerful weapon in the hive.
Become proficient at its use and you will see the
victories pile up.

B
G

60

LM

Page 45

Chapter 6.2 – The Cover

Page 46

Play Hive® Like a Champion

by Randy Ingersoll

Chapter 6.3 – The Block

Chapter 6.3 – The Block
The previous two tactics have been primarily tactics used
on offense. Now we will discuss an important defensive one,
The Block. Based on the Freedom to Move rule, standard
bugs cannot move through a gate (Section 4.1). This is very
important when placing and moving bugs. Moving a bug into
a gate position denies opposing bugs access to the area behind
the gate.

The use of a block is extremely important when protecting
your Queen. Ants, Spiders, and the opposing Queen cannot
move through a gate. If a vacant space adjacent to your Queen
is blocked by a gate, your Queen is immune to attack into
these spaces from these bugs.

6.3.1 – Placing the Block

Let’s look at an example (HV-bird-ringersoll-2010-12-262049) of two good blocks leading to victory in a game with
Mosquito and Ladybug. Figure 6.3.1 shows turn 22 by Black.
Four of the six spaces around the Black Queen are already
occupied. White has just placed Beetle #2 in position to move
into space A. Black responds with the move depicted, pinning
the White Beetle, but more importantly, setting up the block.
Notice how the pinned White Beetle prohibits any Ant,
Spider, or Queen move into space A.
A few turns later we come across the position in
Figure 6.3.2. Again, White has just placed another bug
(White Ant #3) into a threatening position. From its initial
position White Ant #3 can easily move into space B. But,
Black has other plans. The defensive maneuver as shown does
create a ring, but it also places a block to protect space B.

Figure 6.3.3 (page 48) shows the position following the
placement of Black Ant #3 on turn 34. Notice how both
space A and space B are continuing to be protected by the
blocks. Space A is now completely surrounded and space B is
protected by Black Spider #2. Another interesting positional
note: Black has carefully placed bugs to control where White
can place additional bugs from the reserve. Even though
White has a Hopper and a Mosquito in reserve, neither of
these bugs can be placed into a position to threaten either of
the two critical spaces. (For more information about this, see
Chapter 7.3 – Controlling Bug Placement.)

Figure 6.3.1
21 wB2 /wS1
22 bA2 /wB2

22

A

21

LM

Figure 6.3.2
29 wA3 \wG1
30 bS2 bG1/
29
30

B
A

LM

Page 47

Chapter 6.3 – The Block
With three Ants and a Mosquito mobile on the outside of the
hive and four additional bugs in reserve, Black had no
problem in winning the game in only seven more turns.
All in all, this is an excellent example of using blocks to
protect access to one’s Queen.

As an interesting side note, let’s go back to turn 25 as shown
in Figure 6.3.4. White has just jumped the Ladybug to the
location shown. This forms a ring, freeing White Beetle #2 to
move. Even though the White Beetle cannot move from its
current location directly into space A; it can, in two moves, go
up and over either the White Ladybug or the White Spider.
In this particular game, this Beetle’s ability to go up and over
a block did not play a role in the outcome of the game. But, a
Beetle’s ability to climb over a block must be considered
when predicting the value and potential outcome of placing a
block.
Because of the excellent positioning of the two Black
Hoppers, this game will be considered again in Chapter 7.2 –
Defending the Queen.

Play Hive® Like a Champion
Figure 6.3.3
34 bA3 bG2/
34

B
A

LM
Figure 6.3.4
25 wL1 wB2\

The next example is from an interesting game (HV-antrosringersoll-2011-01-16-1258) in which a well placed block by
Black results in a win, even though White has all three Ants
mobile and on the outside of the hive. Figure 6.3.5 shows
Black turn #42, a subtle shift by Black Ant #3, which keeps
the pin on White Beetle #1 and at the same time blocks access
to space A.

Because of this well timed and placed block, Black was able
to stop White’s attack. White tried hard to free one of the two
Beetles to move in for the victory, but Black Ants #2 and #3
kept both White Beetles pinned. If one follows the play of the
game, it becomes apparent that White could have easily taken
a draw. But instead, White continued to play on for a victory
and in the end Black won. Two Beetles in reserve and two
well placed defending Hoppers finally brought Black the
victory.

25

A

LM
Figure 6.3.5
42 bA3 wB1\

Good defensive players learn early in their Hive®
careers how to see and place effective blocks.

42

A

S

Page 48

by Randy Ingersoll

Chapter 6.3 – The Block

6.3.2 – Removing the Block

Under some circumstances, the block and gate formation
can be a somewhat permanent position and must be kept
in place to the very end. In other games, a block can
be temporary, either safely removed when the threat
no longer exists, shifted to another more advantageous
blocking position, or in some cases, in an endgame race,
removed when victory can be achieved before the
opponent can take full advantage of the removed block.

Figure 6.3.6
41 wA3 -bA2

41

A

Note the point depicted in Figure 6.3.6 from the game
HV-ringersoll-Dragonfly-2010-11-23-0313, when White
Ant #3 can safely remove the block. In this case, the
White Ant leaves the blocking position protecting space A
and instead, takes up a pinning position on two Black
Ants! With all three Black Ants rendered immobile and
Black Spider #1 out of position to move into space A,
White Ant #3 could safely abandon the block.

A

S

As is often the case in Hive®, once White has successfully
defended against Black’s attack, the momentum and
attack shift. When this happens, both in this particular
game and in many games, the counter attacker easily wins
the game.
Knowing when it is safe to remove a block will
free mobile bugs for better use throughout the
hive.

6.3.3 – Converting a Gate

A bug moving into a gate converts the gate into a ring.
Whenever there is a possibility of this, you must carefully
plan a response. Because of the inherent danger in
forming a ring, closing a gate in this manner is not a very
common occurrence. But watch for the possibility and
plan your response. The next game demonstrates how a
gate formed by a block can become a ring. The situation
in Figure 6.3.7 occurred in the game U!HV-FLXringersoll-2011-03-23-2215 after Black’s 24th turn, the
placement of Black Hopper #3. In this situation, Black
actually has blocks set up protecting both space A and
space B.

Figure 6.3.7
24 bG3 bG2-

24

B
A

S

Page 49

Chapter 6.3 – The Block
Figure 6.3.8 shows the situation a few turns later when White
converts the block into a ring. The natural response to the
formation of a ring is, when possible, to move out with a
friendly bug, leaving a string of pinned bugs behind. In most
cases, this is the best response; again highlighting the danger
of forming a ring. But in this case, it would be a mistake for
Black to do so. Moving Black Hopper #3 would open
space B to White Ant #3. Whereas, moving Black Hopper #2
would leave no Black defenders adjacent the Black Queen.
So in this case, Black allowed the ring to remain. Later, when
White Hopper #2 jumped into space A, the block remained on
space B and White Ant #3 was pinned.

If White were intent on trying to force the situation by making
a ring, Figure 6.3.9 goes back a few turns and shows a
potentially better ring. White forms a ring by moving Ant #3
into space C. This ring actually forces the freedom of White
Beetle #1 or the release of the block protecting space A.
If Black Hopper #1 were to break the ring, White Ant #3
could then slip into space A. If Black does not break the ring
by moving Black Hopper #1, then White Beetle #1 climbs up,
over, and into an attacking position.
Converting a gate into a game-winning ring is a skill
that is developed through study and practice.

Play Hive® Like a Champion
Figure 6.3.8
27 wA3 bG3\

27

B
A

S
Figure 6.3.9
Alt 25 wA3 bG1\

6.3.4 – Conclusion
Successful Hive® players watch for potential blocking
positions. While attacking, an experienced player
will minimize the opportunity for the opponent to
set a defensive block. The same player while
defending, however, will always be on the lookout
for a productive defensive block.

B
A
C

25

S

Page 50

by Randy Ingersoll

Chapter 6.4 – The Fill

Chapter 6.4 – The Fill
In two previous sections, The Pin and The Block have been
introduced as successful defensive tactics. The question
becomes, when facing a solid defensive position, one in
which all open spaces around the Queen are blocked and all
Hoppers, Beetles, and Ladybugs are prevented from gaining
access to the opposing Queen, how can a Hive® player free a
bug and win the game?

The answer is The Fill, a common winning offensive tactic.
A fill is a method in which a player on the attack can force
the release and ultimate freedom of a bug by creating a
pocket (Section 4.5) around it. This pocket provides alternate
connections to the hive for the pinning bugs. The bug in the
pocket can then be used to attack the opposing Queen and, in
many cases, win the game.

6.4.1 – Basic Fill

Our first example (T!HV-Loizz-ringersoll-2011-06-13-2356)
of a basic fill comes from the 2011 BoardSpace Online
Tournament, a quarterfinal game between the author and
another Hive® Master, Loizz. The critical, game-winning
move is shown in Figure 6.4.1.

By slipping the Black Queen into space A, an alternate
connection to the hive was provided to White Ant #1. Because
of this alternate connection, the White Ant no longer held the
Black Ladybug in a pin. The Black Ladybug was free to move
and easily won the game on Black’s next move by jumping
into space B. This is a classic use of a fill to force freedom for
a vital bug.

The next game also comes from the 2011 tournament. This
game between two Hive® Masters shows a rather unique fill.
In T!HV-ringersoll-Fumanchu-2011-07-03-1957, the author
uses a Hopper fill to release an Ant to deliver the winning
blow. Figure 6.4.2 shows the Hopper fill on turn 37.
Interestingly, both White Hopper #2 and White Ant #1 can
move into space A. Black can pin the White Hopper. But with
the fill and release of the White Ant, the game was won.
The Basic Fill is an important tool for a top notch
Hive® player’s offensive arsenal. Many games can be
won with its proper use.

Figure 6.4.1
34 bQ bA1\

B

A

34

L
Figure 6.4.2
37 wG2 wA3-

B

B

A

37

LM

Page 51

Chapter 6.4 – The Fill

Play Hive® Like a Champion

6.4.2 – Double Fill

Figure 6.4.3 shows the position late in the game U!HVringersoll-DrRaven-2011-02-07-2318. Black is on the
attack and searching for a way to get a bug into space C.
With two Beetles and a Mosquito atop the hive, White is
well positioned to defend against Black Beetle #1. Neither
the Black Ladybug nor the Black Mosquito is in position
to move into the final space. The Ladybug is covered
by the White Mosquito and the Mosquito is adequately
pinned. The only option is to attempt to force one of
the Black Hoppers into the critical space. DrRaven
accomplishes this with an elegant demonstration of a
double fill.
The plan is to release Black Hopper #2 by using the two
mobile Black Ants. DrRaven first moves Ant #3 into
space A. This provides an alternate connection to the hive
for White Ant #3, thus freeing Black Hopper #2 to move.
White’s only counter is for Ant #3 to shift to space B to
maintain its pin on the Black Hopper.
Figure 6.4.4 shows DrRaven delivering the coup de grace
by moving Black Ant #1 into space D. This again provides
an alternative connection to the hive for White Ant #3.
Safely tucked inside a pocket, Black Hopper #2 cannot be
pinned. White has no defense and is forced to resign.

Figure 6.4.3
46 bA3 /wA3
47 wA3 bG2/

B

47

A
46

C
G

Q
Q
L
G

LM
Figure 6.4.4
48 bA1 bS1/
49 White resigns
D

48

C
G

Q
Q
L
G

A second instructive example of a double fill is shown in
Figure 6.4.5 through Figure 6.4.7. This example comes
from the game U!HV-DrRaven-ringersoll-2011-0208-0123, in which DrRaven is on the receiving end of a
double fill from the author.

The position after turn 29 is shown in Figure 6.4.5. White
Spider #1 has just set a block (Chapter 6.3) to protect
space A. The plan for Black must be to use a fill to release
Hopper #1, which will then hop into space A and win the
game. Again, just as in the previous example, two bugs are
needed to execute this maneuver.

LM
Figure 6.4.5
29 wS1 -wM1

29

A

LM

Page 52

by Randy Ingersoll
First Black places Spider #2 directly adjacent to the target
Hopper as shown in Figure 6.4.6.

Then, in Figure 6.4.7, following White’s placement of the
third Ant, Black completes the double fill with 32 bA3
bG1/.
The Black Hopper is now safely tucked inside a pocket
and cannot be pinned. The game ends on turn 34 when the
Black Hopper jumps into space A.

Chapter 6.4 – The Fill
Figure 6.4.6
30 bS2 /bG1
31 wA3 wG1-

31

30

A

When a basic fill is not enough, a good player
looks beyond the basic fill and is prepared to
find a double fill when circumstances require it.

6.4.3 – 2-for-1 Fill

As demonstrated by the two previous examples, the most
common use of the fill is to release a Hopper, Ladybug, or
Beetle to move in for the victory. But that is not the only
use of this valuable offensive tactic. It can also be used to
sacrifice two bugs to free a different, situationally more
useful one.

As seen in Figure 6.4.8, HV-humdeabril-ringersoll-201012-24-0303 will give us an example of a 2-for-1 fill.
In this case Black sacrifices two Hoppers to release one
Beetle. First, on turn 74, Black moves Hopper #2 to space
A. And after White moved Spider #2 into space C on turn
75, Black Hopper #3 is moved to space B on turn 76. The
pocket formed around Black Beetle #2 frees it to climb
atop the hive and join the attack. The more versatile and
dangerous Beetle helps Black finally win on turn 100.
When bug count is not an issue, a 2-for-1 fill can
quite often be used to release a more valuable bug.
Use this tactic and win!

LM
Figure 6.4.7
32 bA3 bG1/

A
32

LM
Figure 6.4.8
74 bG2 bQ/
75 wS2 bA1\
76 bG3 bB2/
A

74
M

Q

B

76

B

C
75

M

Page 53

Chapter 6.4 – The Fill

6.4.4 – Battle of Fills

The next game (HV-humdeabril-ringersoll-2011-01-312303) illustrates how a game can evolve into a battle of
fills. First one side then the other uses a fill to release an
attacking bug. Games such as this test a player’s ability to
visualize positions many moves into the future.

Play Hive® Like a Champion

Figure 6.4.9
43 wA1 bB2/

As illustrated in Figure 6.4.9, White first releases the
Mosquito by a well timed attacking fill by Ant #1.

A
B

43

C

Q

B

Black responds by placing Hopper #3 as shown
in Figure 6.4.10. This Hopper placement serves two
purposes. First, the newly placed Hopper threatens to
attack the White Queen. If the White Queen moves away,
the Black Hopper stays in place and frees Black Beetle #1
from its cover of White Beetle #1. In the game, White
elected to move the Queen, parrying the threat by the
Black Hopper and threatening to win immediately by
virtue of the White Mosquito previously freed by a fill
when the White Ant moved, back on turn 43.

M
Figure 6.4.10
44 bG3 /bB1
45 wQ wG1/

45

Q

C

B

44

M

Page 54

by Randy Ingersoll
And then in Figure 6.4.11, Black jumps out with Hopper #1
into space D, the pocket formed by four bugs. With the fill of
this pocket, not one, but two Black Ants are potentially freed!
White is forced to respond by sending White Spider #2 to
space E to keep one of the two Ants pinned. But the exchange,
in this instance, of a now pinned Hopper for a freely mobile
Ant is an excellent trade off.

Chapter 6.4 – The Fill
Figure 6.4.11
46 bG1 wA2/
D
E

With two Beetles atop the hive and a Hopper in reserve, Black
had a long, hard fight ahead, but was able to continue on to
win on turn 92.
Learn to examine complex situations in depth and
many opportunities to use The Fill will become
apparent. Victories, too, will pile up.

6.4.5 – Conclusion

Q
B

C

46

M

When on the attack and facing a determined defense,
an experienced Hive® player makes use of The Fill to
free bugs for the final, victorious assault.

Page 55

Chapter 6.4 – The Fill

Page 56

Play Hive® Like a Champion

by Randy Ingersoll

Chapter 6.5 – Bug Placement

6.5 – Bug Placement
The first decision that a Hive® player must make is one
regarding bug placement. Which bug should be used as a
starting bug? And then, from that point on, the questions are
asked again and again, “What bug should I play?” and
“Where should I play it?” The quality of the answers to these
questions directly relates to the quality of one’s play.
No bug should be randomly placed. There must be a plan
behind every new bug placed. What is its goal? Why is it
being brought into the game? How many different ways can
the opposing player counter this placement? And, what will
I do after each of these different counters?

6.5.1 – The Opening

Right from the start, bug placement is a concern. Which bug
should be played first? As we have seen in Section 5.4 –
Strategy and Bugs in the Hive, bugs can be grouped into two
groups: those that can get into and out of interior spaces and
those that cannot. Because the first bug placed is immediately
pinned by one’s second bug, it is most common for one of the
first category bugs to be played first. In the basic game, this
means a Hopper or a Beetle. If the Ladybug and/or Mosquito
are used, either of these are acceptable alternatives. Some
players choose to start with a Pillbug, if available, not because
of its ability to move out of enclosed spaces, but because of
its ability to extract the pieces around it from enclosed spaces.
By rule, the Queen may not be placed on turn one* and even
though the Ant can be the initial bug placed, it is foolhardy to
do so. (See Section 8.1.1 – Beginners’ Mistakes – Starting
with an Ant.)
In Figure 6.5.1 from the game U!HV-Sutured-ringersoll2013-07-27-1636, we can see how both players have started
with a Hopper and continued with the Queen.

Figure 6.5.1
3 wQ \wG1
4 bQ
bG1/

3

4

S

* See the footnote on page 5 referencing the tournament rules regarding Queen
placement on turn one.

Page 57

Chapter 6.5 – Bug Placement
The second decision that must be made early in the opening
is when and where to place the Queen. By rule the Queen
must be placed no later than turn four. But typically, the
Queen is placed on either turn two or turn three. The format
of the opening is completely decided only after the second
Queen is placed. The first player to play the Queen can
eliminate some of the possible variations but the second
player makes the final decision. (More about this is discussed
in Chapter 9 – Opening Theory.)

Comparing Figure 6.5.1 (page 57) and Figure 6.5.2 (from the
game HV-guest-ringersoll-2012-04-13-2347) we see that in
the first, after White had already played the Queen, Black
chose to play a C-opening. Where in the second, White chose
to play an Ant on turn three. This was followed by Black
playing the Queen and then, White chose to play a Z-opening
by playing the Queen on turn five as shown.

Play Hive® Like a Champion
Figure 6.5.2
3 wA1 -wG1
4 bQ
bG1/
5 wQ wA1\

4

3

5

S
Figure 6.5.3
5 wQ \wG1
6 bQ
bL1/

6

5

Our third example in Figure 6.5.3 comes from the game
T!HV-ringersoll-stepanzo-2013-06-15-0955. In this game
from the 2013 BoardSpace tournament, White sacrificed a
tempo by starting with a Spider. This was done to add one
space between the Queens to counteract stepanzo’s aggressive
play with the Pillbug.

LMP

Carefully plan your placements from the opening
move. A well planned opening will lead to a more
successful result.

6.5.2 – Beetle Placement

Even though the Beetle is a slow moving bug, it can be very
powerful both on offense and on defense. Good placement,
however, is vital if one is to get good use from this piece.
We will begin on offense because most beginning players see
the Beetle as primarily an offensive bug. Tempo is the most
important aspect of the game to remember in offensive Beetle
placement. When placing a Beetle to attack, it must be placed
in such a way so that it can get into attacking position quickly,
without an unnecessary loss of tempo.

Figure 6.5.4
22 bG3 \bA3
23 wB1 wS1\

22

23

P

Page 58

by Randy Ingersoll

Chapter 6.5 – Bug Placement

Figure 6.5.5
24 bA2 wB1\
25 wB2 wS1/

Figure 6.5.6
21 wG2 -wA2
22 bG3 \bA3

22

21

25

24

P

P

In the game HV-ringersoll-blefinjo-2013-08-03-1154, both
White Beetles are placed just two spaces away from the Black
Queen. On turn 23, in Figure 6.5.4 on page 58, White
Beetle #1 enters as shown. Even though this Beetle is
immediately pinned (turn 24 in Figure 6.5.5), White follows
with Beetle #2 being placed on turn 25. This Beetle cannot be
pinned and will advance, cover the Black Queen, and negate
the power of the adjacent Pillbug.

This game also demonstrates another very important
placement tactic regarding your Beetles. When your game
strategy requires a Beetle atop the hive, it is important that at
least one of your Beetles be held out until you can be assured
that this can happen. Figure 6.5.6 shows the moves leading
up to the Beetle placements in Figure 6.5.4 and Figure 6.5.5.
When Black, planning to execute a pin replacement, self pins
Ant #3 on turn 22, White realizes that with only one Black
Ant mobile, a White Beetle can be forced atop the hive. This
prompts White to begin the Beetle assault.
From the standpoint of Black, the lesson learned is that self
pinning a mobile Ant may give your opponent the opportunity
to bring in a Beetle and force it up. If your opponent has
unplaced Beetles, you must, consider this possibility at all
times.

Now let’s contrast the successful Beetle attacking placement
in the previous game with an unsuccessful Beetle attack in the
game U!HV-Sutured-ringersoll-2013-07-27-1636.

Figure 6.5.7
21 wB1 wG222 bB1 bG2/

22

21

S

Page 59

Chapter 6.5 – Bug Placement
In Figure 6.5.7 (page 59) White Beetle #1 enters the game on
turn 21, but is a full three spaces away from the Black Queen.
This allows Black to place Beetle #1 in a good defensive
position, one which allows the Black Beetle to intercept the
White Beetle before it can cover the Black Queen.
Going back a few turns to the position in Figure 6.5.8, we see
that when the third, and final, White Ant enters the game,
Black immediately pins it as shown. Now, with all three
White Ants pinned, the Black Beetles can safely enter the
game. Black Beetle #1 enters in a defensive position as we
have already seen. And then much later in the game, Black
Beetle #2 enters and attacks the White Queen. With all three
White Ants pinned, the Black Beetles could not be stopped.
These two previous games are excellent to contrast effective
and successful Beetle placement with ineffective and
unsuccessful Beetle placement. After review it is easy to see
why White won the first game, but lost the second!

Play Hive® Like a Champion
Figure 6.5.8
19 wA3 -wA2
20 bA3 -wA3

19

S
Figure 6.5.9
28 bA3 wA1/

A well placed Beetle can defend in a number of different
ways. We saw in the previous example that a defending
Beetle can intercept an approaching enemy bug before it
covers your Queen. In other situations your Beetle may not be
able to stop the opposing Beetle from covering your Queen,
but by covering the opposing Beetle atop your Queen the
damage done is greatly reduced. Your opponent can neither
use a direct drop nor climb down to fill a space next to your
Queen.
Another good defensive placement of a Beetle is
demonstrated in Figure 6.5.9 from the game U!HV-Suturedringersoll-2013-07-27-1617. Because Beetle #1 was placed
adjacent to the Black Queen very early in the game, it is in
good defensive position, here later in the game. When Ant #3
creates a fill position, the Black Beetle is free to move,
threatening to vacate a spot next to the Queen and/or cover
the White Beetle atop the hive. Good Beetle placement early
saved the game for Black.
Before moving on there is one more point that needs to be
made regarding Beetle placement. Sometimes there occurs an
opportunity for a Beetle to be placed inside a pocket. When
this occurs, the newly placed Beetle cannot be pinned and
therefore, cannot be stopped from climbing atop the hive!

Notice how Beetle #2 is placed inside the pocket in
Figure 6.5.10 from the game U!HV-ringersoll-reh191-201305-12-1739. With both Beetles soon to be atop the hive,
Page 60

20

A

Q

28

S
Figure 6.5.10
34 bP1:bQ bP1\
35 wB2 wB1-

35

G

34

P

by Randy Ingersoll

Chapter 6.5 – Bug Placement

White won easily, even though the Black Pillbug helped the
Black Queen to escape to the outer reaches of the hive.
Careful Beetle placement is a vital skill that must be
learned before one can be considered a true Hive®
Master. Learn how to place this powerful bug, both
on offense and on defense.

6.5.3 – Spider and Hopper Placement

Due to their limited movement patterns, the Spider and the
Hopper pose different problems than the Beetle. They can
move greater distances each turn, but are severely limited by
their movement rules.
Initial placement is particularly important for the Spider.
The game U!HV-Sutured-ringersoll-2013-07-27-1617
between the author and a beginner is an exceptional example
of this. This game evolves into a C-opening, and as we will
learn in Section 9.2.1, these openings typically revolve
around two critical spaces. (See Figure 9.2.1 on page 224.)

White’s Spider placement on turn five and subsequent attack
on turn seven (Figure 6.5.11) leaves both critical spaces
empty. Black immediately takes one of the critical spaces on
turn 8 in Figure 6.5.12.
Now let’s see the next game after Sutured has been shown
the difference one space can make when a Spider’s initial
placement is involved. Figure 6.5.13 shows the same series
of turns five through seven from the game U!HV-Suturedringersoll-2013-07-27-1636.

What a huge difference in these two games. Very early in this
second game, Sutured takes one of the two critical spaces.
This subtle difference in the placement of a Spider meant a
huge difference in the game. Even though ringersoll’s
experience ultimately led to him winning both games, the first
lasted only 34 moves, while the second lasted almost twice as
long, 64 moves. This difference can be primarily attributed to
the initial placement of the White Spider.

Figure 6.5.11
5 wS1 wQ/
6 bA1 bQ7 wS1 bQ/
5

7
6

S
Figure 6.5.12
8 bA1
wQ/

8

S
Figure 6.5.13
5 wS1 \wQ
6 bA1 bQ7 wS1 \bQ

5
6
7

S

Page 61

Chapter 6.5 – Bug Placement
Initial placement is also critical for the Hopper. It must be
aimed toward its final destination space, either directly or
indirectly by means of a hop around. If it is not, then it may
never be able to reach its ultimate destination.

Play Hive® Like a Champion
Figure 6.5.14
17 wG1 \wM1
18 bM1 -wG1
19 wG2 wQ/

The following three figures from the game HV-ringersollriver-2012-04-07-1405 show four Hopper placements, two
good ones from White, followed by two poor ones from
Black. Watch how this happens!

White begins by bringing in Hopper #1 in Figure 6.5.14.
With this Hopper in position to attack the Queen, Black’s
reply is almost forced. On turn 18 Black pins the newly
placed Hopper with the Mosquito. This drastically reduces the
effectiveness of Black’s most powerful bug! A moment ago,
it had the power of an Ant and could go anywhere in the hive.
Now it is relegated to the movement of a mere Hopper,
doomed to this spot for the remainder of the game.

The second White Hopper immediately enters on turn 19 in a
good offensive/defensive position, ready to attack the Black
Queen and vacate a space next to the White Queen.

Now let’s compare the first two Black Hoppers. Hopper #1
enters on turn 24 in Figure 6.5.15. Note that it is placed
adjacent to the Black Queen and promptly pinned. It will
never leave this spot!

17
19

18

LM
Figure 6.5.15
24 bG1 bQ\
25 wA2 bG1\

25

A short while later, Black Hopper #2 enters on turn 28 in
Figure 6.5.16. Where is it going? It has no good attacking or
defending purpose.

24

The end result was a victory for White.

Initial placement is important for all bugs, but vitally
important for Spiders and Hoppers! There must be a
plan for each of these bugs. Where is it going and
what is it going to do? Place these bugs in position to
fully accomplish their purpose.

LM
Figure 6.5.16
26 bS1 wA2\
27 wG2 wM1/
28 bG2 bS1\

27

26

28

Page 62

LM

by Randy Ingersoll

6.5.4 – Pinning the Elbow

By placement rules, each new bug placed must be adjacent to
a friendly bug. It may not touch any opposing bugs. In most
cases this means that the bug just placed automatically pins
another friendly bug. These next three sections cover some
of the situations that must be considered when making
placement decisions.
The first of these situations will be referred to as ‘pinning the
elbow.’ The sample again comes from the game U!HVSutured-ringersoll-2013-07-27-1636. In Figure 6.5.17 Black
brings in Ant #2. White follows by placing Spider #2.

Black then pins the White Spider as shown. This, in turn, pins
the White Hopper. Until this elbow pin is relieved, the
defending Hopper cannot jump out and save the Queen.
This weakness remains for the entire game. White never can
force freedom for the defending Hopper.
A potentially better placement for White Spider #2 would be
space A. From this position, the newly placed spider threatens
to pin Black Ant #1. If the Ant moves then the Spider would
threaten to attack the Black Queen.

Chapter 6.5 – Bug Placement

Figure 6.5.17
8 bA2 bG1\
9 wS2 /wG1
10 bA2 -wS2

9

8
10

S
Figure 6.5.18
6 bA1 bS1\
7 wA1 /bA1

7

A second example comes from the game U!HV-ringersollgierek-2012-02-04-1949. Figure 6.5.18 shows the placement
of Black Ant #1, which is then pinned by White Ant #1.
The Black spider, pinned in the elbow, never moves again.

In Figure 6.5.19 we see the game as it draws to a conclusion
with both the Black bugs still hopelessly pinned.
Be very careful about self pinning an elbow. The
pinned bug may never be able to gain its freedom.
An elbow pinned defender may be no defender at all!

A

6

S
Figure 6.5.19
29 wG3 /wS1

29

G

G

S

Page 63

Chapter 6.5 – Bug Placement

Play Hive® Like a Champion

6.5.5 – Placement on the Queen

When a new bug is placed adjacent to one’s Queen, there
exists the possibility that it will be pinned against the Queen.
Not only is this bug now pinned and immobile, but worse yet,
it fills one of the six spaces needed for one’s opponent to win!
If this is a Beetle or a Hopper, it may later be able to exit the
spot. But if it is a Spider or an Ant, it may be stuck there long
term, possibly even until the end of the game.
This is demonstrated in Figure 6.5.20 from the game U!HVOlegT-ringersoll-2012-03-31-1858. When White Ant #2 is
brought into the game adjacent to the White Queen, Black
jumps at the chance and pins the White Ant against the
Queen.

Figure 6.5.20
23 wA2 wQ\
24 bA2 wA2\

Even after this series of moves it may seem that White is
ahead. Comparing the situations of the two Queens we see
that four spaces around the Black Queen are occupied as
compared to only three around the White Queen. White
already has a Beetle atop the hive and in position to cover the
Black Queen. But the major difference, the one that leads to
the Black victory, is the type of bugs adjacent the two Queens.
The two White bugs (Spider #1 and Ant #2) that are pinned
against the Queen will never be able to escape. While the two
Black bugs (Hopper #1 and Beetle #2) are both capable of
escaping when necessary. If you review the entire game,
you will see that neither of these two White bugs moves
throughout the rest of the game.

A better placement for White Ant #2 would have been
space A. Even though it places a block on space B, it allows
the White Ant to enter the game without being pinned against
the Queen.
You may be forced to let a bug be pinned against
your Queen. But if at all possible don’t let it happen.
An Ant or Spider in this position may not be able to
move for the remainder of the game! And if this is
the case, it might cost you a victory!

Page 64

A
G

B

24
23

S

by Randy Ingersoll

Chapter 6.5 – Bug Placement

6.5.6 – Double Pin

When your opponent has mobile bugs, particularly mobile
Ants, it is very important that your bug placement does not
allow the opportunity for the Double Pin.

Remembering that one of the three keys to victory is strength,
it is easy to see the danger of a double pin. By allowing one
of your opponent’s bugs to pin two of yours, you have given
your opponent an edge in this vital area.
Look at Figure 6.5.21, another example from the game
U!HV-Sutured-ringersoll-2013-07-27-1636. White Ant #1 is
placed adjacent to the already pinned White Spider #2. Black
takes advantage of the situation by pinning the newly placed
Ant with Black Ant #1. This relieves Black Ant #2 to be used
elsewhere while the two White bugs continue to be pinned.

There are better choices for the placement of White Ant #1;
space A for example. While it is true that Black could
still perform what looks like a double pin, there is a major
difference! White Spider #1 is already attacking the Black
Queen. It does not matter if it gets pinned. And also, Black
Ant #2 would not be freed from its duty to pin White
Spider #2.

Figure 6.5.21
11 wA1 wS2\
12 bA1 wA1-

A

12

11

S

The placement of the White Ant which allowed the double pin
was just one small mistake that led to White’s eventual defeat.
If other placements are available, don’t place a new
bug in the position to be immediately double pinned.
Look for other, more promising placement options!

6.5.7 – Conclusion
In order to become proficient at playing this game, it
is vital that one learns good bug placement skills.
Learn when and where to place new bugs and your
win percentage will climb.

Page 65

Chapter 6.5 – Bug Placement
This concludes the five chapters that make up
Section 6 – Elementary Tactics. Study, practice,
and perfect these five basic tactics and your win
percentage will no doubt rise.

As you play, however, you will notice other more
subtle tactics that arise. This brings us to the
following section: Section 7 – Advanced Tactics.

In these seventeen chapters you will progress from
beginner to novice to expert, and you will truly
‘Play Hive Like a Champion.’

Page 66

Play Hive® Like a Champion

by Randy Ingersoll

Chapter 7.1 – Counting Bugs

Chapter 7.1 – Counting Bugs
One of the three keys to victory is Strength. Are there enough
bugs on either side to force a victory? Bug counting is most
critical when on the defensive. One must continually ask,
“Does my opponent have enough bugs to force a win?” If the
answer is no, then there is a good chance that you can
withstand the attack.

Of course when asking this question, you must examine three
areas. The first is bugs currently in play: count bugs that are
already attacking your Queen and bugs that are already in
position to attack. Secondly, count bugs that are still in the
opponent’s reserve. How many bugs are in reserve and can
these bugs be introduced to the hive in such a way that they
can join the attack? And finally, are there any opposing bugs
that are in play and not available to attack but currently placed
in such a way that they could be brought into the attack?

7.1.1 – Defensive Bug Counting

Since accurate bug counting is most critical on defense, this
is where we will start. Having the first move, White typically
is the aggressor in the opening stages. Let’s examine a few
games from Black’s perspective and see how we can benefit
from counting bugs.
To begin, we will consider Figure 7.1.1, from the game HVDEIBY-ringersoll-2011-06-12-1139. It is White’s turn to
move. Should Black be concerned? Let’s count bugs.

First, White has two bugs already attacking the Black Queen
and a third (Hopper #3) in position to attack. In addition to the
bugs already in play, White has one Ant and two Beetles in
reserve. With four empty spaces to fill and four available
bugs, it would seem that White has enough to win.

As Black, we need to consider the defensive options. Ants are
the best defenders so let’s look at them first. Of the three
Black Ants in play, Ant #1 and Ant #2 are already in use
pinning White bugs. Either of these two pinned White bugs
could immediately attack the Black Queen if the pins were
released. Ant #3, however, is available for defense. Also, if
given enough time, a pin replacement (Section 6.1.2) could
possibly be executed on either or both of the two Black Ants
currently serving pin placement duty. All in all, Black is in a
good defensive position.

Figure 7.1.1
22 bS1 \wQ

22

S

Page 67

Chapter 7.1 – Counting Bugs
A few moves on each side bring us to the position in
Figure 7.1.2. Black has successfully pinned White Beetle #1
before it has had the opportunity to move in and attack the
Black Queen. Now White has three spaces to fill and only the
two bugs in reserve remaining. Black should, and in fact did,
stop the attack by White.

Play Hive® Like a Champion
Figure 7.1.2
25 wB1 wA2\
26 bA3 /wB1

25

Our second example of good defensive bug counting is from
the game HV-Antin-ringersoll-2011-05-29-1110. A quick bug
count will show why Black shifted Spider #1 from attack to
defense as illustrated in Figure 7.1.3.

White Beetle #2 is in position to execute a Beetle cover
(Chapter 6.2) on the Black Queen. The two bugs in reserve for
White can then be placed immediately into attacking
position. With the Beetle poised to move into attacking
position, all White needs to force a victory is one more bug!
When looking about the hive, Black realizes that the only real
threat to be that final bug is White Ant #1. And the only
hope to prevent this Ant from entering the fray is to pin it
immediately. And that is what Black did.

26

S
Figure 7.1.3
28 bS1 \wA1

28

With two of the three White Ants pinned and five bugs in
reserve, Black had no problem winning the game. Accurate
bug counting by Black paid off with a victory.

One final example will wrap up this discussion. It is a very
early game in the author’s Hive® playing career. He is playing
Black against his mentor, Eucalyx (U!HV-Eucalyx-ringersoll2010-08-22-1100). Black has taken the initiative early and has
a strong attack brewing. But unfortunately, he is also running
out of bugs. He needs two bugs and has two bugs in
reserve. The upcoming bug placements are critical!
Figure 7.1.4 shows the position as Black places his last
Beetle on turn 30 and White proceeds to pin it on turn 31.

Black’s bug count has now been reduced below what is
needed to win. But relieving the pin on the Black Queen has
given Black an alternate source for another bug. With Black
Ant #2 pinned inside an elbow (Section 6.1.3 – The Pin –
Releasing a Pin) the Black Queen can set it free.

S

S
Figure 7.1.4
30 bB2 bG2\
31 wA3 bB2\

G

30

31

S

Page 68

by Randy Ingersoll
In Figure 7.1.5, we see the Black Queen sliding into the
elbow on turn 32. On turn 33, White counters by using
Beetle #1 to place a block (Chapter 6.3). And then on turn 34,
Black Beetle #1 climbs atop the White Queen. This move by
Black is particularly threatening because it potentially allows
a direct drop (Section 6.2.2) by Black’s last bug.

Chapter 7.1 – Counting Bugs
Figure 7.1.5
32 bQ bG133 wB1 wG1\
34 bB1 wQ

As we continue in Figure 7.1.6, White slides the pin by
Ant #1 to prevent the direct drop and Black moves to pin the
White Ant. On turn 37, White places Beetle #2 to bring in
another defender and Black follows by bringing in his last
bug.

If counting bugs were all that there were to analyze a position,
we would conclude that Black needs three bugs to win and
has three bugs available. But that is not the case. We will
continue the discussion of this game in Chapter 7.7 – Playing
for a Draw. Even though White has pinned the Black Queen,
has two Beetles and two Ants free, and has three bugs in
reserve, this game ends in a draw.
When being attacked, keep track of your opponent’s
available force. Accurate bug counting shows the
way to good defense and lets a good Hive® player
know when to switch from defending to attacking.

7.1.2 – Offensive Bug Counting

Now let’s examine bug counting from an offensive viewpoint.
When on the attack, you must continually ask yourself a
series of questions. First, do I currently have enough bugs in
play to force a win? Second, how many bugs are in reserve
and can these bugs be brought into play in such a way that
they too join the attack? And finally, are there bugs that are
currently in play but pinned or blocked and therefore unable
to assist? Can these bugs be freed?

34

Q

33
32

S
Figure 7.1.6
35 wA1 bS2/
36 bA2 wA1/
37 wB2 wB1\
38 bG3 -bS2

35

38

36

Q

37

S

As an example, let’s go back to the game HV-DEIBYringersoll-2011-06-12-1139 in Figure 7.1.2 (page 68) and
count Black bugs. Black already has two bugs in attacking
position. Four bugs are already in play and can be brought in
to attack. Unfortunately, however, the three Black Ants are all
holding crucial pins and therefore do not count. But Black has
no problems because there are four bugs in reserve (one
Beetle, one Spider, and two Hoppers).

Page 69

Chapter 7.1 – Counting Bugs
Figure 7.1.7 shows the situation a few moves later. Black
has just brought in Hopper #2 and in a last ditch effort to
free another bug, White has moved Beetle #2 into a fill
position (Chapter 6.4), hoping to free Beetle #1. But it
doesn’t matter. Black can shift the pin by Ant #3 to keep
White Beetle #1 under control or can just go for the all out
attack.

Play Hive® Like a Champion
Figure 7.1.7
38 bG2 \bS2
39 wB2 bQ\
40 bA3 wB1\
38

Q

Reexamining Figure 7.1.3 (page 68) from the game HVAntin-ringersoll-2011-05-29-1110, we can take our
second offensive bug count. Black only has six bugs in
play. That means that there are still five bugs in reserve.
Those bugs are two Beetles, two Hoppers, and one Spider.
With one Ant free and these five bugs ready to be brought
in, Black has no problems in forcing a win.

B

Q

39

40

White, too, recognized this and immediately switched
from offense to defense. But with two of his three Ants
pinned, White’s defense was futile. Black won easily on
turn 48.

S

Keeping an accurate bug count while attacking is
very important; just as it is while defending.

7.1.3 – Complex Bug Counting

In most cases, bug counting is not as cut and dried as in
the previous examples. Each of those examples clearly
had an attacker (White) and a defender (Black). Black first
had to count bugs to determine if White’s attack could be
stopped. And then, after the attack was stopped, attention
was turned to the Black bug count and the Black offense.
Generally speaking, however, bug counting is more
complex than that as each of the following two examples
will show. Bugs must be accurately counted on both sides.

For the first example, please refer to Figure 7.1.8, a game
of standard Hive® (U!HV-DrRaven-ringersoll-2011-0119-0226) between two good opponents. At first glance,
White may seem to be in an excellent position because of
the two Beetles atop the Black Queen. But let’s count bugs
and see what we discover.
Except for the two Beetles and one Hopper in reserve, all
of White’s bugs are pinned. Does White have enough bugs
to win? No, there are four spaces to fill adjacent to the
Black Queen. Counting the Hopper in reserve, there are

Page 70

Figure 7.1.8
34 bA3 \wG1

34

Q

B

S

by Randy Ingersoll

Chapter 7.1 – Counting Bugs

only three bugs to fill them. The only bugs that might
be available to add to this total are Hopper #1 and
Ant #1. But, unfortunately for White, both of these
bugs are currently pinned. In addition, there are no
potential ways to force an additional bug free. So, for
all practical purposes, even though White is on the
move, White cannot win.
Now let’s count bugs for Black. Black has three bugs
in reserve, one Hopper and two Beetles. But with four
spaces to fill, Black needs one more bug. Fortunately,
Black has three bugs in position to attack the White
Queen. These bugs are Spider #1, Ant #2, and Ant #3.
Black must play very carefully, however. Each of
these additional bugs is currently being used to pin a
bug that if released at the wrong time could result in
victory being given to White.

A few turns for each side have passed and the game
has progressed as shown in Figure 7.1.9. Black has
successfully brought both Beetles into the game.
Black may choose from either of two paths to gain
victory. One path would take Beetle #2 to space A and
then Beetle #1 would climb down into space B. This
would take three moves by Black. The other path is
quicker. Either Ant #2 or Ant #3 moves into space A
and then Beetle #2 slips into space B. This path, the
one actually chosen by Black, takes only two moves.
Note that Black’s timing is important because either
Ant move releases an opposing White Ant which can
immediately attack the Black Queen. But, White’s
attack falls one tempo short and Black wins.
One more example should suffice to drive home this
concept. Take a look at Figure 7.1.10 from another
standard game without any optional bugs (U!HVguest-ringersoll-2011-01-28-2345). White is on the
attack with a Beetle covering the Black Queen and
two Hoppers in reserve. At first glance it may seem
that White’s attack will succeed. There are three
empty spaces to fill and three White bugs to fill them.
But this is not the case. Black has strategically left
Black Hopper #2 in an excellent defensive position.
As soon as it has the necessity and opportunity to do
so, the Black Hopper will hop out leaving White one
bug short of victory.

Figure 7.1.9
53 wB2 wB1

A
B
A

B

53

B

S

Figure 7.1.10
29 wB2 bQ

A
Q

B

29

C

S

Page 71

Chapter 7.1 – Counting Bugs

Play Hive® Like a Champion

On the other hand, let’s examine Black’s position. The
White Queen is pinned with four empty spaces. Black has
a Spider, two Beetles, and a Hopper in reserve, AND three
mobile Ants. Counting available bugs shows that Black
has more than enough force to gain the victory. And, in
fact, Black won rather handily.

Figure 7.1.11 shows the position a few turns later. White
has brought in Hopper #2 immediately next to the Black
Queen. Then, on turn 32, Black Hopper #2 hopped out as
shown. This had the dual advantages of clearing a space
next to the Black Queen and replacing the pin on White
Ant #3.
Then as soon as White Hopper #3 entered the game (turn
35), the newly freed Black Ant places the pin (turn 36),
leading to the position in Figure 7.1.12. Black can easily
finish the game by bringing in the third Hopper and the
two Beetles while White mindlessly moves his Beetle
back and forth. But Black elects to win with a quicker plan
using the three Ants to fill the final three spaces to victory.
The final outcome will be discussed in Chapter 7.12 –
Counting Tempo.
Situations that appear complex can quite often
be easily analyzed by counting bugs. Make sure
you are on the right side of the bug counts and
victories will come to you in droves!

7.1.4 – Conclusion
Count bugs to help plan your game. Learn
to accurately count bugs both offensively and
defensively and your skill level and victory
count will continue to climb.

Page 72

Figure 7.1.11
30 bS2 /bG1
31 wG2 wB1\
32 bG2 -bA2

32
Q

30

31

S

Figure 7.1.12
35 wG3 wG236 bA2 wG3/
35

Q

36

S

by Randy Ingersoll

Chapter 7.2 – Defending the Queen

Chapter 7.2 – Defending the Queen
The entire premise of the game Hive® centers on the Queen.
A player must attack the opponent’s Queen while at the same
time defending one’s own. Attacking comes naturally to most
beginning players. Defense, on the other hand, must be
learned. Let’s examine five ways that one can defend the
Queen.

7.2.1 – Moving Out of Harm’s Way

The easiest and most obvious defense is to move your Queen
when she is attacked. Typically, you will move her toward the
outer reaches of the hive. A Queen in contact with the hive on
only one side will require five more bugs to surround her.
If your opponent does not have five bugs available, this may
guarantee that you do not lose. This may not, however, mean
that you are assured of a victory. If you do not have a strong
enough force at your disposal to force a victory (Chapter 7.1
– Counting Bugs), you may have to settle for a draw.

If your opponent has an available attacking force of at least
five bugs that are able to reach your Queen, moving may not
be the best defensive option. Later we will learn why keeping
in contact with friendly, defending bugs is sometimes a better
option.
In the game HV-xenotime-ringersoll-2010-11-23-2326, Black
repeatedly moves the Queen toward the edge of the hive, each
time reducing the force at White’s disposal by leaving another
bug pinned. White jumps in with Hopper #1 in Figure 7.2.1
and it is immediately pinned as the Black Queen escapes.

Two turns later, as shown in Figure 7.2.2, White Beetle #1
approaches, and again, the Black Queen moves toward the
outside of the hive, this time leaving the White Beetle pinned.

Figure 7.2.1
15 wG1 bG116 bQ wG1A
16

15

S
Figure 7.2.2
19 wB1 wG1\
20 bQ wB120

A
19

S

Page 73

Chapter 7.2 – Defending the Queen
And finally, in Figure 7.2.3, another White bug is added to a
string of already pinned bugs as Hopper #2 attacks and the
Black Queen escapes. Note how each time White’s force is
reduced, it becomes easier for Black to defend. After turn 24,
White needs five more bugs to surround the Black Queen.
Of the bugs currently in play, only one of them is available for
this task, the others are all pinned. With only four bugs in
reserve, White barely has enough to do the job. But all Black
will need to do is pin one more bug as it comes into play and
it will be impossible for Black to lose!

Play Hive® Like a Champion
Figure 7.2.3
23 wG2 wG124 bQ wG2-

A
24
23

Of course, Black’s attack is so strong that it will never get to
that point. Black won easily on turn 42.
Watch for opportunities for your Queen to escape
and defending her will be much easier.

7.2.2 – Pin the Attackers

Another relatively obvious defense is to pin opposing bugs
before they have the opportunity to attack your Queen. When
you are able to pin more than one bug with just one of yours,
you are effectively reducing your opponents attacking force.

You should also look for opportunities to pin a valuable bug
like an Ant or Beetle with a less valuable bug like a Spider.
Doing so leaves your own Ants and Beetles for other
defensive maneuvers, or better yet, for attacking your
opponent’s Queen when the tide turns and you can counter
attack.
In Figure 7.2.4, from the game of standard Hive® HVDrRaven-ringersoll-2011-01-02-0157, note how White
Hopper #2 was just placed from the reserve in such a way to
threaten victory by hopping into space A. Black responded by
moving Black Ant #3 to pin the White Hopper and thwart the
White attack.

Page 74

S

Figure 7.2.4
25 wG2 wS226 bA3 wG226

A
25

S

by Randy Ingersoll
In the previous example, the Queen defense occurred late in
the attack. Pinning the attacker can, and in most cases will,
occur long before the final threat is made. Follow along with
the next game (U!HV-bird-ringersoll-2010-12-11-1848) as
Black defends with a series of pins.

In Figure 7.2.5 White brings in both White Beetles hoping to
get one of them into attacking position. Black has other plans,
however, as each Beetle gets pinned immediately upon its
arrival. First the Black Mosquito pins White Beetle #1 and
then Black Ant #2 pins White Beetle #2. The availability of
the Black bugs to execute these pins shows the importance of
mobility! In this game Black is in control of the outside of the
hive and is able to defend.
The next figure shows a few turns later as the last White bug
is introduced into the game. White Hopper #3 is promptly
pinned by Black Ant #3 as shown in Figure 7.2.6. White is
out of bugs and the Black Queen has been successfully
defended. Black’s counter attack will now begin and Black
will win easily.
Keep mobile and pin the attackers to defend your
Queen.

Chapter 7.2 – Defending the Queen
Figure 7.2.5
33 wB1 wA2/
34 bM1 wB1/
35 wB2 wA3/
36 bA2 \wB2
36
35

33

34

LM
Figure 7.2.6
43 wG3 wL144 bA3 wG3-

43

44

LM

Page 75

Chapter 7.2 – Defending the Queen

7.2.3 – Place a Block

A very effective tactic to protect against your opponent’s
Queen, Ants, and Spiders is a block (Chapter 6.3). When you
can move a bug and create a gate formation that is blocking
access to a space adjacent to your Queen, you have blocked
that space from your opponent’s Queen, Ants, and Spiders.
Only Hoppers, Beetles, Ladybugs, and Mosquitoes can reach
the space behind the gate.
In Figure 7.2.7, from the game HV-DrRaven-ringersoll2011-01-02-0157, Black Spider #2 moves as indicated,
forming a gate between the two Black Spiders. This gate
blocks access to space A. In addition, if White had elected to
move Beetle #1 atop the Black Queen, the space vacated by
the White Beetle is also protected by the gate. In the actual
game, White chose to move Spider #2 and fill the fifth space
around the Black Queen. You might recognize this position as
one leading up to the discussion in Section 7.2.2 – Pin the
Attackers.
Also a continuation from the previous section is Figure 7.2.8,
from the game U!HV-bird-ringersoll-2010-12-11-1848.
As White brings in Hopper #2, Black makes a subtle but very
important shift in the positioning of the Black Mosquito.
By sliding over one space, the Black Mosquito has now
placed a block protecting space A. White Ant #1 can no
longer gain access to this space. This is very important
because White Hopper #2 is now posed to either pin Black
Ant #1 if White Ant #1 were to move or to replace Black
Ant #1 if it were to move away. In either case, White
Hopper #2 would be able to join the attack on the Black
Queen.

But as it is, the well placed block not only prevents the attack
by White Ant #1 but, in effect, blunts the effectiveness of
White Hopper #2.
Learn to use a block to defend your Queen and she
will be happy and safe.

Page 76

Play Hive® Like a Champion

Figure 7.2.7
22 bS2 \wB1
23 wS2 wA2\
22
23

A

S
Figure 7.2.8
37 wG2 wM1\
38 bM1 wB1-

38

A
37

LM

by Randy Ingersoll

7.2.4 – Adjacent Friendly Defenders

It is virtually impossible to keep all enemy bugs away from
your Queen. Inevitably, your opponent will move bugs into
attacking position adjacent to your Queen. If, however, there
are friendly bugs adjacent to your Queen, these bugs
can move away, vacating one of the six spaces required to
surround your Queen. If she is not otherwise pinned, she may
actually be able to escape.

Hoppers, Beetles, Ladybugs, and Mosquitoes are the bugs of
choice to fill this role. Even if your Queen is pinned and
unable to move, these bugs (if they are not covered by a
Beetle or prohibited from moving by the One Hive rule) can
vacate the space by moving out. This may also free these bugs
for other tasks and this vacated space may be very difficult for
an attacking bug to occupy, if it protected by a block.
Or better yet, your Queen may now be free to escape.

Due to the Freedom to Move rule, Ants and Spiders are less
valuable defenders in this type of situation because it is too
easy to block these bugs and render them unable to move
away.
Please take a look at Figure 7.2.9 and Figure 7.2.10 (HVDrRaven-ringersoll-2011-01-02-0157). The first figure
shows turn 14 when Black places Hopper #2 in an excellent
defensive position adjacent to the Black Queen. This
formation with two friendly Hoppers adjacent to each other
and adjacent to the Queen typically creates an easily defended
formation.

Chapter 7.2 – Defending the Queen

Figure 7.2.9
14 bG2 bQ\

14

S
Figure 7.2.10
27 wB2 wQ/
28 bG2 wA2A
27
28

B

S

The second figure shows some time later when Black
Hopper #2 hops out and vacates a second space next to the
Black Queen. By vacating this second space, White can no
longer threaten to win in just one move. This relieves much of
the immediate pressure that White could apply.

Also note that after hopping to space A, the Black Hopper is
also in position to perform a pin replacement (Section 6.1.2)
on White Hopper #2. By moving to space B, the pin
replacement is performed and Black Ant #3 will be free to be
used in attack or defense elsewhere in the hive.
Adjacent friendly defenders are the cornerstone to a
successful Queen defense. Learn how to use them
and your win percentage will rise!

Page 77

Chapter 7.2 – Defending the Queen

7.2.5 – The Beetle Defense

The Beetle Cover discussed in Chapter 6.2 is a very strong
offensive tactic, one that must be defended whenever
possible. An excellent defense to use against approaching
enemy Beetles is the Beetle Defense.

Placing a friendly Beetle atop the hive and in close proximity
to your Queen is the key. When an opposing Beetle
approaches, your Beetle can climb up, cover the enemy
Beetle, and stop its attack.
A warning, however, is appropriate. Essentially, your Beetle
is now permanently relegated to this position. Unless the
position opens up and the covered Beetle is prohibited from
moving, it will be in position to immediately cover your
Beetle if it should move. Depending on the situation, it may
then be in position to attack your Queen.
Continuing with HV-DrRaven-ringersoll-2011-01-02-0157
from the previous paragraphs, let’s look at Figure 7.2.11.
White needs to fill two spaces to win. He has one Beetle atop
the hive and one Hopper in reserve, so he has the necessary
force to do this. Let’s examine the possibilities.
With an Ant free (Black Ant #3 freed by the Pin Replacement
by Hopper #2), White must be very careful in placing the
White Hopper from the reserve. Fortunately for White, this
Hopper can be place into the pocket (space A) that will allow
it to attack the Black Queen. In fact, from space A, it is
impossible to stop the Hopper!

So Black must concentrate on stopping White Beetle #2. This
is done with a Beetle defense.

The next figure (Figure 7.2.12) shows the situation four
moves later as Black moves Beetle #1 into position between
the White Beetle and the final space required for White to
win. As you can see, the Black Beetle is properly positioned
to defend against the opposing Beetle. If the White Beetle
tries to approach the Black Queen, the Black Beetle will cover
it. And with no more bugs in reserve, White will not be able
to force a victory.
This game has demonstrated an excellent example of a
properly applied Beetle defense.

Page 78

Play Hive® Like a Champion

Figure 7.2.11
34 bB1 bG1\

A

A

34

S
Figure 7.2.12
38 bB1 wG1

38
A

G

S

by Randy Ingersoll
The next game (U!HV-ringersoll-cesc-2010-09-18-1355)
shows how a properly placed Beetle can not only defend as in
the previous example, but can climb out to vacate a space
adjacent to the friendly Queen.
In Figure 7.2.13 Black has just placed Beetle #2 in position
to attack the White Queen. White responded with a Beetle of
his own, placed into a good defensive position. Now if the
Black Beetle moves in and covers the White Queen, it will in
turn be covered by the White Beetle. This would negate much
of the advantage created by the Beetle Cover.

As the game progressed, Black continued the assault.
In Figure 7.2.14 we see Black threatening to win. But the
White Beetle climbs up and out, vacating another space
adjacent to the White Queen, and at the same time providing
an escape route for the White Queen. Black must spend a
tempo to keep the White Queen from escaping and in so
doing, White Ant #1 will be freed by a pin replacement by
Hopper #2.
With two Ants free to move, White will have no problem
stopping the two Ants in Black’s reserve and denying Black a
victory. Then, with three bugs in reserve, all three Ants
mobile, and a Beetle atop the hive, White will have no
problem winning the game.
Here we have another example of a good defense; in this case
a defense centered on the Beetle Defense.
The best defense against an approaching enemy
Beetle is a nearby friendly Beetle. Keep your eyes
open to the opportunities for this defense and your
Queen will continue to be well protected and safe.

Chapter 7.2 – Defending the Queen
Figure 7.2.13
18 bB2 /bG2
19 wB1 /wG1

18

19

S
Figure 7.2.14
26 bG3 wQ/
27 wB1 wG1

26

G

27

S

7.2.6 – Conclusion
To ‘Play Hive® Like a Champion’ one must study,
learn, and apply all the aspects of defending the
Queen.

Page 79

Chapter 7.2 – Defending the Queen

Page 80

Play Hive® Like a Champion

by Randy Ingersoll

Chapter 7.3 – Controlling Bug Placement

Chapter 7.3 – Controlling Bug Placement
Games can be won or lost based on the placement, or
misplacement, of just one bug! Learning to effectively place
your bugs is vitally important. But equally important can be
learning how and when to control the bug placement of your
opponent.

7.3.1 – In the Opening

Controlling your opponent’s bug placement and the benefits
derived there from begin in the opening few moves as
demonstrated in the opening situation shown in Figure 7.3.1.
This is a very common position from a popular
Ladybug/Mosquito opening for Black.

White has elected to pin the Black Mosquito and makes the
proper choice as shown. It is potentially a mistake to place the
pin in space A. Placing the pin as shown denies Black
space B for new bug placement, forcing Black to place the
next bug and self pin the Black Queen. If, however, the pin is
placed in space A, then Black can bring the next bug into
space B, leaving the Queen free from the self pin and still able
to maneuver if necessary.
Another commonly seen position is demonstrated in
Figure 7.3.2. Here White pins the Black Queen and at the
same time denies Black new bug placement in space C. This
is important because space C is an excellent spot for a
defensive Beetle or Hopper in standard Hive® or a Ladybug or
Mosquito if playing with the expansion bugs. Please refer to
Section 7.2.4 – Defending the Queen – Adjacent Friendly
Defenders for more information on this subject.

In this latter case, care must be taken because if a bug does
move into space C before space A is occupied, then the Black
Queen may be free to escape. This is a decision that an
experienced Hive® player must make. Does one gain the
control over the opponent’s bug placement at the risk of a
Queen escape? Or does one forego the control of bug
placement and ensure the pin on the opponent’s Queen?
Again, we have another example of the depth of the game that
makes it so enjoyable to play!

Figure 7.3.1
7 wA1 bM1/
B
A
7

LM
Figure 7.3.2
9 wA1 bQ-

C

9

A

B

S

Page 81

Chapter 7.3 – Controlling Bug Placement

Play Hive® Like a Champion

These two examples repeat in many games but here are the
two specific games that the above examples were taken from:
T!HV-fumanchu-ringersoll-2011-07-02-1918 and HVlukiejro-ringersoll-2010-07-29-2049.
Start looking to control your opponent’s new bug
placement right from the beginning and undoubtedly
your results will improve.

7.3.2 – Leads to Double Pin

The player who can pin two opposing bugs with just one of
his own has created a net gain in strength, one of the three
keys to winning. Each time this is done, the player has taken
another step closer to a successful ending. Watch how a Hive®
champion controls his opponent’s bug placement in the game
HV-EddyMarlo-peter20-2011-05-23-0417.
Starting with Figure 7.3.3, notice how White uses the Beetle
Cover of the Black Queen as an effective springboard to bring
in new bugs. On turn 19 White brings in the Mosquito
adjacent to an already played Ant in order to make sure that
the Mosquito has the Ant movement ability right from its
initial entry into the game. Black is already limited to just five
choices for new bug placement (the five spaces identified
by letter in this figure). Each of these spaces allows an
immediate double pin by White.

Figure 7.3.3
19 wM1 wA2\

A

B

C

D

Q

E

19

LM
Figure 7.3.4
20 bA3 bA2/
21 wM1 bA3/

20

In Figure 7.3.4 Black makes a less than optimal choice for
Ant #3 and White pins with the Mosquito.
Allowing this triple pin of the Mosquito, Ant #2, and Ant #3
was a serious mistake by Black. With just one bug, White has
rendered immobile and virtually useless three of the most
powerful Black bugs!

21

Q

LM

Page 82

by Randy Ingersoll

Chapter 7.3 – Controlling Bug Placement

The next Black bug coming into play is Spider #1, brought in
on turn 22 as shown in Figure 7.3.5. Again, this new Black
bug is instantly pinned, this time by White Ant #2. Take
notice of how space A is left open for new Black bug
placement. But if it is used for a new bug, White just shifts the
pin from a double pin to a triple pin. If, however, White had
pinned the Spider in space B, then a new Black bug could be
placed in space C without the danger of the triple pin.

Figure 7.3.5
22 bS1 /bG1
23 wA2 -bS1

22

C

B

Q

A
23

Figure 7.3.6 shows the position two turns later after Black
has brought in Hopper #2 and White has added Ant #3 to the
game. Turn 26 in this figure shows Black Beetle #1’s initial
placement and the subsequent pin by White Ant #3. Again,
notice how White continues to control the spaces available for
Black bug placement. This time it is space A, inside the
pocket, that is controlled. This space is important because a
bug brought into space A will free Black Ant #2.

LM
Figure 7.3.6
26 bB1 \bM1
27 wA3 bB1/
A

26

27

Q

The next Black bug to enter the game is Beetle #2.
Black chooses one of the three available spaces as shown in
Figure 7.3.7. And, as expected, White immediately responds
with a pin by Ant #1. The placement and subsequent pin of
Black Beetle #2 also has the added effect of releasing the need
for the pin of Black Beetle #1 by White Ant #3.

LM
Figure 7.3.7
28 bB2 -bB1
29 wA1 \bB2

29
28

Q

LM

Page 83

Chapter 7.3 – Controlling Bug Placement
Black Hopper #3 is brought into play on turn 30. And, as
expected, White Ant #3, freed by the previous series of
moves, is immediately used to pin it. These moves are shown
in Figure 7.3.8.

Play Hive® Like a Champion
Figure 7.3.8
30 bG3 bG231 wA3 bG331

Black has no mobile bugs and only one bug in reserve, a
Spider. White, on the other hand, has three Ants and a
Mosquito mobile, a Beetle atop the hive covering the Black
Queen, and six (!) bugs in reserve. The White attack when it
begins shortly will be unstoppable and quick!

30

Force your opponent into positions where you can
place double and triple pins, they usually lead to
winning positions.

Q

LM

7.3.3 – Leads to a Shutout

When properly executed, the control of your opponent’s bug
placement can easily lead to a Shutout (Chapter 7.5) and then
on to a relatively easy win. A good example of this comes
from the game U!HV-weronika-ringersoll-2010-12-04-2229.

Figure 7.3.9
24 bA3 bS1-

24

In Figure 7.3.9 we see Black bringing in Ant #3. Note how
all three of Black’s Ants are on the outside of the hive and
mobile. This again highlights the importance of mobility in a
successful Hive® game. Note also the limited mobility of
White (only the White Queen can move) and how few spots
there are in which White can bring in a new bug (only three:
spaces A, B, and C).

A
B

C

S

Page 84

by Randy Ingersoll

Chapter 7.3 – Controlling Bug Placement

White brings in Hopper #2 into space B. Black’s reply, as
depicted in Figure 7.3.10, is to pin with Ant #2.

An instructive side point is demonstrated here. Typically, one
of the early goals in the game of Hive® is the immobilization
of the opposing Queen. In most cases this is accomplished by
a well placed pin. Here, however, Black is ignoring the White
Queen and instead concentrating on the other White bugs.
Remembering the lessons taught in Chapter 7.1 – Counting
Bugs, a good player will sometimes choose to follow this
example in order to reduce the forces available to the
opponent.

As depicted in Figure 7.3.11, the White Queen moves on turn
27 and when Black pins with Ant #3, the shutout has been put
in place. All of White’s bugs have been rendered immobile
and even though White has four bugs in reserve, there is no
place to put them.

Figure 7.3.10
25 wG2 -wA2
26 bA2 -wG2
26

25

S
Figure 7.3.11
27 wQ /bA1
28 bA3 /wQ

Now, finally, with the White Queen isolated and pinned,
Black has no problem bringing in the last three bugs and
winning in just a few more moves.
The shutout is a powerful tactic which is, in many
cases, brought on by one player controlling the other
player’s new bug placement. Be that player and you
can control your destiny to ‘Play Hive® Like a
Champion’ and win!

27

28

S

Page 85

Chapter 7.3 – Controlling Bug Placement

7.3.4 – Used on Defense

As we have seen, an important key to controlling your
opponent’s bug placement is controlling the outside of
the hive. Control the outside of the hive and you can dictate
when and where new bugs are introduced. Nowhere is this
more vitally important than when on the defense against a
concerted attack. Watch the game HV-BlackMagic-ringersoll2010-10-30-2103 as Black thwarts the White attack with
excellent bug placement control.

Play Hive® Like a Champion

Figure 7.3.12
29 wL1 bG1-

A

29

Q

B

C

In Figure 7.3.12 we see the White Ladybug filling the fifth
space next to the Black Queen. Only one more bug is needed
and White will win.

There are four bugs still in reserve for White: a Mosquito, an
Ant, a Beetle, and a Spider. With a block (Chapter 6.3 –
The Block) placed to protect the sixth space from both the Ant
and the Spider, the battle will pivot around the Mosquito and
the Beetle. Notice how Black has limited White’s new bug
placement to only three spaces, labeled A, B, and C.
Not content, however, Black moves Ant #3 as depicted in
Figure 7.3.13 in order to limit a newly placed White bug’s
access to the critical winning space.

B

LM
Figure 7.3.13
30 bA3 wS1/
31 wM1 wL1\
32 bS1 wM1\

30

Q

White brings in the Mosquito on turn 31 and then the Beetle
on turn 33, as shown in Figure 7.3.14. But each time Black
has a counter. First, Black Spider #1 pins the White Mosquito
and then Black Ant #3 does the same to White Beetle #2.

With the immediate threat from Black stopped, White now
goes on the offensive. This game will be discussed again in
Chapter 7.4 – Counter Attack.
This game has provided an excellent example of how superior
mobility and the control of the outside of the hive allow White
to control Black’s bug placement and secure a well earned
victory.

B

32

31

LM
Figure 7.3.14
33 wB2 wM1/
34 bA3 wB234

Q

B

33

LM

Page 86

by Randy Ingersoll

Chapter 7.3 – Controlling Bug Placement

The same theme can be seen in the game U!HV-isearch12ringersoll-2010-09-19-0157: control the outside of the hive
and control the opponent’s bug placement.

In Figure 7.3.15 White is executing an Ant fill (Chapter 6.4 –
The Fill) to release one of the two Beetles which will
move in and continue the attack on the Black Queen. This
Beetle will occupy the critical fifth space around the Queen,
leaving only one more space to secure victory. Meanwhile,
Black continues with the pin replacement (Section 6.1.2),
freeing Ant #3.

Figure 7.3.15
29 wA3 wB2\
30 bG2 bA3\
31 wB2 wG1

30

31

29

In Figure 7.3.16 Black Ant #3 places a pin on White Hopper
#2 as White Beetle #2 attacks. This Ant move further reduces
the spaces available for new White placement. This control of
bug placement will be the key to the Black defense.

M
Figure 7.3.16
32 bA3 /wG2
33 wB2 bB1\

33
G

32

M

Page 87

Chapter 7.3 – Controlling Bug Placement
Figure 7.3.17 shows as Black covers White Beetle #2 and
now Black’s defense is completely in place. White has two
excellent attacking bugs in reserve. One is the third and
final Hopper and the other is the ever powerful Mosquito.
The problem, however, is that there are only three spaces
available to place new bugs. These are the spaces labeled
A, B, and C in this figure.

Play Hive® Like a Champion
Figure 7.3.17
34 bB1 wB2
B

A

C

34

The final figure (Figure 7.3.18), shows as the last White
bug enters the game and promptly get pinned by Black
Ant #1.

B

With no White threats to worry about, a Beetle in reserve,
and complete control of the outside of the hive, Black had
no problems. Black began an unstoppable counter attack
and won on turn 59.
Would you like to become a master defender?
If you do, then you must learn how to control
your opponent’s bug placement.

7.3.5 – Conclusion
One of the most important skills for any new
Hive® player is the ability to control one’s
opponent’s new bug placement. From the
opening, through the midgame, and continuing
into the endgame this skill pays dividends over
and over.

M
Figure 7.3.18
39 wG3 wQ/
40 bA1 wG3/
39
40

B

Learn how to control the outside of the hive and
control your opponent and you will win, win, win.
M

Page 88

by Randy Ingersoll

Chapter 7.4 – Counter Attack

Chapter 7.4 – Counter Attack
In the course of most games of Hive® one player is typically
on the attack with the other player defending. Usually, due to
the advantage of first move, White is the attacker with Black
defending. If the defender is successful and withstands the
initial attack, there comes a critical time in the game where
the opportunity for a shift of momentum occurs. Knowing
when and how to switch from defense to offense is the sign of
a good Hive® player.
A successful counter attack typically hinges on one of the
three keys to victory mentioned early on in Section 5.1 –
Strategy in the Hive – Three Keys to Victory. In order to
counter attack and win, the defender must maintain enough
Strength in reserve to insure that the counter attack will be
strong enough, and/or maintain enough Mobility to bring
enough bugs into the attack, and/or have the Tempo to win
the race to the end. Each of these will now be considered
individually.

7.4.1 – Counter Attack with Strength

When a player on the defense is successful in completely
stopping the opponent’s attack, it is only natural that the
defender begins an attack of his own. In order to successfully
counter attack and win, the defender must maintain enough
Strength in reserve to insure that the counter attack will be
strong enough to deliver the win. The next two examples will
show successful counter attacks brought about by good
defense, followed by bugs brought in from the reserve.
Example number one is HV-BlackMagic-ringersoll-2010-1030-2103, which was discussed earlier in Chapter 7.3 –
Controlling Bug Placement. The game picks up in
Figure 7.4.1 with the placement and pin of White’s final bug.

Black has defended well and is now in position to begin the
counter attack. With four bugs in reserve Black has more
force than necessary to bring in the victory. Care must be
taken, however, because with just one vacant space next to the
Black Queen, one wrong move and White can easily win.

Figure 7.4.1
43 wS2 wG2/
44 bM1 wS244

Q

B

43

LM

Page 89

Chapter 7.4 – Counter Attack
White’s movement options are limited. None
of White’s options offer a chance to free an
additional bug for the final attack. Figure 7.4.2
shows the position a few moves later as Black
Hopper #2 enters the game.

Play Hive® Like a Champion
Figure 7.4.2
51 wM1 wL152 bG2 bA2-

51

Q

B

A

52

The newly arrived Black Hopper attacks on turn
54 as depicted in Figure 7.4.3.

LM

Figure 7.4.3
53 wG3 wA1/
54 bG2 bG1/

Q B

53

A

54

And then, in Figure 7.4.4, the Black Ladybug
enters. With no defense available, White will
continue to make meaningless moves while the
Black Ladybug occupies space A followed by any
of a group of Black bugs winning by moving into
space B.

LM
Figure 7.4.4
55 wG3 /bA2
56 bL1 \bG2
56

A

B

55

Q

B

A

LM

Page 90

by Randy Ingersoll
The same theme appears in the game U!HVweronika-ringersoll-2010-12-04-2247 where, in
Figure 7.4.5, the final White bug (Spider #2) has just
been placed. Black brings in Spider #1 as shown and
with two more bugs in reserve, Black has no problem
winning.

Chapter 7.4 – Counter Attack
Figure 7.4.5
37 wS2 wG238 bS1 bB1/

38

37
Q

Q

White’s helpless attempt to defend and the entry of
Black Spider #2 are shown in Figure 7.4.6. Black
could easily bring in the second Beetle from the
reserve and win with the two Beetles but quicker is
one of the Black Ants into space A followed by Black
Beetle #1 into space B.

S
Figure 7.4.6
39 wA2 bG1/
40 bS2 bG2/

40

39
Q

Whenever possible, when defending, keep
bugs in reserve for the counter attack. Wins
will follow as sure as spring follows winter.

B

A
Q

S

7.4.2 – Counter Attack with
Mobility

A successful counter attack can also be based around
superior Mobility. Watch in the game U!HV-birdringersoll-2010-12-12-2109 as Black exploits
superior mobility and wins the game.

Notice the advantage in mobility that Black has
established in Figure 7.4.7. Black has just brought in
Ant #3 and now has three mobile Ants. The only
bugs mobile for White, on the other hand, are the
Ladybug and the Queen. Black will soon exploit this
significant difference in mobility!

Figure 7.4.7
19 wQ \wS1
20 bA3 bL1\

19

20

LM

Page 91

Chapter 7.4 – Counter Attack

Play Hive® Like a Champion

Figure 7.4.8
21 wL1 bA322 bA3 -wQ

Figure 7.4.9
24 bS2 -bA3
25 wB1 wA2/
26 bS2 wQ/

25

26
21
22

24

LM

LM

When the White Ladybug moves into position to attack,
Black Ant #3 starts the counter attack with a pin placed on the
White Queen (Figure 7.4.8).

Figure 7.4.10
29 wB2 -wA1
30 bG1 -bA3

With the White Queen now immobilized, the Black bugs
begin to enter the game and attack. Black Spider #2 enters on
turn 24 and attacks on turn 26 (Figure 7.4.9).

When Black Hopper #1 enters on turn 30 (Figure 7.4.10), the
game is virtually over. Due to a serious lack of mobility, there
are no White bugs in position to defend against the Hopper’s
attack. It is interesting to note that the only placements
available for the White Ant in reserve are spaces A, B, and C.
If White brings in Ant #3, Black has bugs available to
immediately pin! Again, this shows the superiority of Black’s
mobility.
The game finally comes to a conclusion as shown in
Figure 7.4.11. Black attacks with Ant #2 on turn 32 and
nothing can stop Hopper #1 from going into space B and
when that occurs, the Black Ladybug is now free to finish the
game by jumping into space A.
Stay mobile on defense and watch for the opening to
turn your superior mobility into a successful counter
attack.

30

C
A

A
29

B

LM
Figure 7.4.11
32 bA2 bA3/
33 wL1 bG1/

32

33 B

A

A

LM

Page 92

by Randy Ingersoll

7.4.3 – Counter Attack with Tempo

The third key to victory is Tempo and is exemplified in a
timed counter attack.

A good example of this is HV-Desire-ringersoll-2010-08-172054. As this game is reviewed, notice how Black ignores
White’s attack plan and counter attacks to victory.

White’s chance for victory centers around space A in
Figure 7.4.12. The plan is to execute a 2-for-1 fill (Section
6.4.3) by moving the White Mosquito into the pocket formed
around this space. This will free both White Hopper #2 and
White Hopper #3. White Hopper #2 will jump into space D
and free White Beetle #2. Then White Hopper #3 will be
threatening to jump into space B and White Beetle #2 will be
threatening to move into space C. Given time, White will
execute this plan and win. But with a careful counting of
tempo, Black realizes that a victory is available with a timed
counter attack starting with a Beetle cover of the White Queen
on turn 38.
White continues the march of the White Mosquito toward
space A in Figure 7.4.13. Black meanwhile is exploiting the
Beetle Cover. Watch how the Beetle Cover allows three
consecutive new bug placements directly into attacking
position, starting with the second Black Beetle on turn 40.

With the 2-for-1 fill successfully completed on turn 41, White
Hopper #3 begins the execution of the White assault in
Figure 7.4.14 (page 94). Unfortunately, Black’s timed
counter attack wins the day.
Looking at Figure 7.4.15 (page 94), a quick count shows that
White wins by one tempo!

Black’s count is three. Hopper #3 comes in from the reserve,
being placed in space A. Black Ant #3 moves into space C and
then Black Ant #1 or Beetle #1 moves into space B.

White’s count is also three. White Hopper #3 hops into
space E and White Beetle #2 takes two moves to get into
space D.

Chapter 7.4 – Counter Attack

Figure 7.4.12
37 wM1 wA1
38 bB1 wQ
38

C

B

37

A

A

D

M
Figure 7.4.13
39 wM1 wS1
40 bB2 \bB1
41 wM1 wG3/
40

Q

39

S

41

A

M

With the counts equal, the player with the move has a one
tempo advantage. In this case, Black wins.

Page 93

Chapter 7.4 – Counter Attack
Figure 7.4.14
42 bS2 bB1/
43 wG2 bA3/

Play Hive® Like a Champion
Figure 7.4.15
Black to move

42

A

Q

Q

B

C
D

E

43

M

M

The second example of a timed counter attack comes from
HV-Eucalyx-ringersoll-2011-03-26-1103 between two Hive®
Masters. In this game, Black starts the counter attack with an
unexpected defensive move, releasing a pin on a Beetle in
order to place a double pin on an Ant-Mosquito string. Follow
the counter attack starting with Figure 7.4.16.

The White Mosquito enters the game on turn 19 and Black
takes the opportunity to place the previously mentioned
double pin. Even though this releases White Beetle #1 to
move into place and execute a cover on the Black Queen, this
maneuver leads to the timed counter attack and a win for
Black. One of the keys to the upcoming counter attack is the
excellent defensive placement of the Black Ladybug and
Black Mosquito. Note that when White attacks into either
space A or space B, one of the defending bugs will be
released. And in either case, the defending bug can
immediately switch roles and attack the White Queen!
While White moves in and executes the cover with Beetle #1,
Black brings in additional attackers. First Black Ant #3 enters
on turn 22 in Figure 7.4.17.

Figure 7.4.16
19 wM1 wA120 bA2 wM1/
20

A

B

19

LM
Figure 7.4.17
21 wB1 -wS1
22 bA3 bL1\

21

A

B

22

LM

Page 94

by Randy Ingersoll
And then Hopper #1 comes in as depicted in Figure 7.4.18.

Chapter 7.4 – Counter Attack
Figure 7.4.18
23 wB1 bQ
24 bG1 bA1/
24
23

A

Even though the cover allows White Ant #2 to direct drop
adjacent to the Black Queen on turn 25, the game is lost for
White. When examining Figure 7.4.19, White’s dire situation
is easy to see. Black only needs to fill two spaces, C and D,
has two mobile Ants, plenty of bugs in reserve, and an
excellent defensive position around the Black Queen.

LM
Figure 7.4.19
25 wA2 -wS1
26 bG1 /bA1

7.4.4 – Counter Attack Too Early

There is a danger however. Counter attack too early and you
may lose! Watch the game HV-guest-ringersoll-2010-12-071154 in which the author, as Black, attacks too early, and
White, Eucalyx playing incognito ☺, wins in the end.

With only a few bugs already brought into the hive, White
Beetle #1 advances toward the Black Queen on turn 11
and a possible cover. Rather than defending, Black counter
attacks, first with Ant #2 as shown in Figure 7.4.20 and then
Hopper #2 as depicted in Figure 7.4.21 (page 96).

25

26

White tried in vain to defend, but Black won easily in just six
more moves.
A good Hive® player is constantly on the lookout for
opportunities to counter attack. With accurate
counting of tempo, wins are available with the timed
counter attack.

B

Q

C

A

Q

B

D

LM

Figure 7.4.20
11 wB1 -wA1
12 bA2 \wQ

11

12

LM

Page 95

Chapter 7.4 – Counter Attack
White quickly shows the shortcomings in Black’s decision.
Figure 7.4.22 shows as each side brings in two more bugs
and White gains a valuable tempo with each bug. Both of the
White Spiders (turns 15 and 17) enter the game in attacking
position. Meanwhile the Black Mosquito and Black Ant #3
enter the game but not in attacking position. Each of the Black
bugs needs another move to attack the White Queen.
When White brings in Hopper #2 as shown in Figure 7.4.23,
Black realizes the mistake and switches to defense. But it is
too late, with all three Ants and a Mosquito in the game and
available for defense, Black was able to extend the game for
twelve more turns, but White won easily in the end.
In addition to highlighting the power of the cover,
this game teaches a valuable lesson against the
dangers of counter attacking too early!

Play Hive® Like a Champion
Figure 7.4.21
13 wB1 bQ
14 bG2 /bA2

Q

14

LM
Figure 7.4.22
15 wS1 wB116 bM1 -bA2
17 wS2 -wA1
18 bA3 /bG2

17

16

Q

7.4.5 – Conclusion
A master Hive® player knows the value of a well
planned counter attack. Watch for opportunities to
counter attack using an advantage in Strength,
Mobility, or Tempo and victories will pile up.

13

15

18

LM

Figure 7.4.23
19 wG2 wS1/

19

Q

LM

Page 96

by Randy Ingersoll

Chapter 7.5 – The Shutout

Chapter 7.5 – The Shutout
Mobility, one of the three keys to victory (Section 5.1 –
Strategy in the Hive – Three Keys to Victory) is critical in
the game of Hive®. Decreased mobility usually results in a
lessened chance of victory. The Shutout occurs when this
decrease in mobility has been taken to the extreme and one
player can no longer make any legal moves. When this occurs,
defeat is almost inevitable for the player who cannot move.

7.5.1 – Complete Shutout

Look at the series of moves depicted in Figure 7.5.1 through
Figure 7.5.5. This game with both Mosquito and Ladybug
(U!HV-bird-ringersoll-2011-01-08-1517) is between a
relatively new Hive® player playing White and the author
playing Black. Figure 7.5.1 depicts turn 19 by White. Not
realizing the tenuous position that he is in, White moves
Beetle #1 atop the Black Queen.
Black immediately responds by covering the White Beetle
with the Black Mosquito (Figure 7.5.2). Now all the White
bugs in play are either pinned or covered and White must
place a new bug. Even though White has seven bugs in
reserve, only spaces A and B are available for placement. No
matter which space is chosen for the new bug, Black moves
Ant #3 to space C. This not only pins the newly placed bug,
but denies White any additional space to bring in a new bug.

Figure 7.5.1
19 wB1 bQ

19

LM
Figure 7.5.2
20 bM1 wB1
C

A
B
Q

20

Figure 7.5.3 shows this series of moves, leaving White on the
move, but with no legal move or placement. Black then brings
bugs into the game while White can do nothing but sit, watch,
and pass.

LM
Figure 7.5.3
21 wG2 -wS1
22 bA3 -wG2

21

22
Q

B

LM

Page 97

Chapter 7.5 – The Shutout
Figure 7.5.4 shows the position as Black Beetle #2
prepares for the ‘coup de grace.’ Realizing the
inevitability of defeat, White falls on his own sword
and finishes the game by hopping into the final space
himself.

Let’s now go back a few moves and look at the
position as it existed in Figure 7.5.5. Black has
executed the shutout and with White unable to move
or place a new bug, Black has brought in both Beetles
and moved each of them into attacking position atop
the White Queen. Black must now carefully fill the
spaces adjacent to the White Queen in the proper
order. Spaces A and B should be the first two spaces
filled. They can be filled by bugs coming in from the
reserve and can safely be done in either order. But
care must now be taken before filling space C or
space D. The reason is that as soon as either of these
spaces is filled, the White Ladybug can move. (It is
interesting to note that when space D is filled, White
Hopper #1 is also free to move. But moving the White
Hopper does not interfere at all with the attack of the
White Queen.)

Since the White Ladybug is adjacent to the White
Queen, moving it will create a problem. In this
scenario, with two Beetles atop the hive, a Mosquito
nearby, Hoppers in reserve, and an opponent with
limited movement options, White will still win easily.
But in another game in which your opponent is also
threatening or you have a limited number of bugs
available to attack, correctly choosing the order of
attack could be critical.
Watch for opportunities to execute a shutout
and when you do, wins should easily follow!

Play Hive® Like a Champion
Figure 7.5.4
32 wG1 bS2/

L

32
Q

B

LM
Figure 7.5.5
27 bB2 bB1

C
B

Q

B

D

Q

B

A 27

LM

Figure 7.5.6
49 wA3 \bS2
49

7.5.2 – Partial Shutout

A shutout does not have to be complete in order
to force a victory. Figure 7.5.6 shows the position
close to the end of a well fought game between two
excellent players (HV-Fumanchu-ringersoll-2011-0111-0056). Black Ants #2 and #3 are free and White
has no practical way to pin either one of them. None
the less, White won relatively easily.

C
B
A

M

B

LM

Page 98

by Randy Ingersoll
Having three free Ants, a Beetle and a Mosquito atop the
hive, and two Hoppers in reserve, it may seem that White
has no potential problems, but that is not the case. Black
has two defenders adjacent to the Queen, the Ladybug
between the two Queens, and the Mosquito under White
Beetle #1. Given the right circumstances, either of them
could escape. Care must be taken to neutralize both of
these bugs and to fill the remaining spaces in the correct
order.

Since the Black Mosquito is already covered, the
successful plan for White starts with using the White
Mosquito to cover the Black Ladybug. Following this,
Hopper #1 will jump into space A. One of the free Ants
(NOT White Ant #2 because releasing the pin on Black
Hopper #2 will allow Black to win) moves into space B
and then finally the Mosquito will move into space C.
While this is going on, White’s Partial Shutout limits
Black to making meaningless moves with the two Ants.
As depicted in Figure 7.5.7, White executed the plan
perfectly and was rewarded with a well earned victory.

A second example of a partial shutout is from the game
HV-ringersoll-chornyi-2011-02-26-1124. Figure 7.5.8
shows the situation on turn 109. White has executed a
partial shutout. The only Black bug that can move is
Hopper #1 and the only thing that it can do is jump back
and forth between its current location and space A.
Space A is safe because if White Ant #3 moves, then
Black Ant #2 is no longer pinned. But moving to any
other space other than back to its original space leads
directly to a complete shutout.

Chapter 7.5 – The Shutout
Figure 7.5.7
57 wA3 wB1/
58 bS2 bB1/
59 wM1 bL1/

57
58

59
L
M

LM
Figure 7.5.8
109 wS2 bS2-

109

Q

A

B

S

Page 99

Chapter 7.5 – The Shutout
Next, notice how White uses Beetle #1 and Hopper #2 to
free Ant #1. In Figure 7.5.9 White covers Black Ant #3,
jumps Hopper #2 into the open pocket, and White Ant #1
is free.

Play Hive® Like a Champion
Figure 7.5.9
117 wB1 bA3
118 bG1 \bA2
119 wG2 bB2/

119
A
117

Q

118

A few moves later (while Black is continuing to do
nothing but jump Hopper #1 back and forth) we come to
Figure 7.5.10 where White finally executes the shutout.
We will continue with this game in the next section as
White demonstrates how to effectively release a shutout.

S
Figure 7.5.10
125 wA1 bG1\
A

A shutout is great, but a partial shutout can also
provide a path to victory. Learn to recognize the
potential of the partial shutout and your victories
will continue to pile up.

B

125

S

Page 100

by Randy Ingersoll

Chapter 7.5 – The Shutout

7.5.3 – Shutout Release

In many cases a shutout leads directly to victory for
the controlling side without the opponent ever getting
another opportunity to place a bug or make a move.
Or, recognizing the futility of continuing, the victim of
the shutout may resign. But in some cases, victory cannot
be attained without ending the shutout and allowing the
opponent to move.

Figure 7.5.11
128 wS2 \wQ

B
128

A

In those cases, identifying the most opportune time to
execute the shutout release is critical. Releasing the
shutout too early may provide your opponent with the
chance to put up a defense, make it more difficult to win,
or even force a draw. In the worse case (Section 7.5.4 –
Overconfidence) it may actually result in a loss.

Continuing with the example from the previous section,
HV-ringersoll-chornyi-2011-02-26-1124, let’s look again
at Figure 7.5.10 (page 100). White has executed the
shutout, but a quick bug count seems to come up short.
White needs four bugs to win but other than White
Beetle #2, all the other mobile White bugs are currently
being used defensively. White Beetle #1 is tied down
covering Black Ant # 3. White Spider #2 is currently
pinning Black Spider #2. And White Hopper #1 is
pinning Black Spider #1. We have seen from the previous
section that Black Hopper #1 is not a threat, so even
though White Ant #1 is pinning the Black Hopper it is
free to move. Watch how opportune use of a shutout
release produces the winning bugs.

On turn 128 (Figure 7.5.11), White releases Black
Spider #2. The two choices for the newly released Spider
are to move to space A or to space B. Moving to space A
has the advantage that it may release Black Beetle #2, but
has the disadvantage that it fills a space next to the Black
Queen. Therefore, Black chooses to move to space B.

A
Q

S
Figure 7.5.12
129 bS2 \wS2
130 wQ wG2-

A

129

B

A

130

Q

White frees his Queen (Figure 7.5.12) and again, Black
has two choices. Neither of them is very good! If the
Black Spider moves to space A, White reinstitutes
the shutout by covering with Beetle #1. Next, White
shifts the Queen back to space B to pin Black Ant #1,
pins Black Spider #2 with White Spider #2, and White
Beetle #1 is free to attack.

S

Page 101

Chapter 7.5 – The Shutout
Space B is no better. When the Black Spider moves into
space B, White pins it with the Queen (turn 132 in
Figure 7.5.13). With the shutout in place again, White
Spider #2 pins Black Ant #3 (turn 134) and another
White Beetle is free to join the attack! Note how White
took an extra move (turn 133) to clear the White Queen
so that when filling space A, a ring would not be created
because in most cases “Rings are bad” (Section 8.3 –
Beginners’ Mistakes – Making a Ring).

Play Hive® Like a Champion
Figure 7.5.13
131 bS2 wQ/
132 wQ bS2\
b pass
133 wQ bS2b pass
134 wS2 -wB1

131
134

A
133

132

White has smartly used this series of moves to release a
White bug (Beetle #1) which can now join the attack on
the Black Queen.

A
Q

White does it again on turn 139 (Figure 7.5.14), by
attacking with White Ant #1. Black Hopper #1 is
released but has only one, non-productive move. White
releases yet another bug as the attack continues with
Hopper #1 (turn 141). But Black Spider #1, too, has no
productive move to make.

S
Figure 7.5.14
139 wA1 bQ/
140 bG1 \bA2
141 wG1 bB1-

B
A

G

139

141
G

140

S

Page 102

by Randy Ingersoll
White is looking to get an Ant into space A, followed by
Beetle #1 winning by going into space B. But in
Figure 7.5.15, Black counters by pinning White Ant #3 with
Hopper #1.

White makes a waiting move on turn 143 to waste a tempo,
and now Black is in Zugzwang. Two bugs can move, but
moving either releases a White Ant and White wins in just
two more moves. (An instructional side note is that the
excellent placement of two Black Hoppers adjacent to the
Black Queen keeps both White Beetles busy. White must
carefully plan the attack in order to not release these Black
defenders.)
This game has provided an excellent example of the Shutout
Release used in such a way to bring about a well earned
victory. (As a side note, this game lasted 147 turns and took
almost 1 1/2 hours (!) to play.)

Chapter 7.5 – The Shutout
Figure 7.5.15
142 bG1 wA3\
143 wQ bS2/
143

A

G
142

G

Time your shutout release properly and victory will
be yours!

S

7.5.4 – Overconfidence

A word of warning in an offensive shutout position: Beware
of overconfidence. In Figure 7.5.16 the author, in a game
(HV-humdeabril-ringersoll-2010-12-25-0431) against a
strong opponent, had the game in hand with a shutout
position, the opposing Queen covered, and three bugs atop the
hive. A win should have been a foregone conclusion, but
overconfidence and a failure to pay close attention cost him
the game.
The important point that was overlooked was that with the
occupation of either space B or space C, a ring would be
formed. With the formation of the ring, both White Hopper #1
and White Hopper #2 would be free to move. One of them
would jump into space A and White would win.

Figure 7.5.16
59 bB1 bG1\
60 wG2 bQ\

C

B

B

60

59
Q

A

LM

Page 103

Chapter 7.5 – The Shutout
The proper plan would have entailed using two of the bugs
atop the hive to cover the two Hoppers, form the ring, and
force White to move one of the mobile bugs in the ring. With
the ring no longer a threat, Black could maneuver back into
position and force the victory. Black, however, overlooked
the ring, moved Beetle #1 into space C, and White won with
Hopper #2.
Don’t become overconfident. A wrong move in a
shutout situation can quickly turn a victory into a
defeat.

7.5.5 – Conclusion
Always be on the lookout for opportunities to take
complete control of the hive. And even more
importantly, protect your mobility. Carefully guard
against allowing yourself to be shutout by your
opponent.

Page 104

Play Hive® Like a Champion

by Randy Ingersoll

Chapter 7.6 – Making a Ring

Chapter 7.6 – Making a Ring
“Rings are bad!” is a maxim that most beginning Hive®
players learn very early on. But as your skill level
increases you will begin to see positions in which making
a ring is actually a good thing. Both offensively
and defensively, a ring can be a tactical tool when
used correctly.
Bad rings are discussed in Section 8.3 – Beginners’
Mistakes – Making a Ring. So there is no need to discuss
them here. This chapter is about good rings and how to
identify and use them.

The two common themes throughout these game-winning
ring making positions are: 1) a friendly bug is in position
to move because of the ring and 2) enemy bugs are
properly pinned, covered, or blocked and therefore cannot
move. If either of these two themes is not present, think
carefully. Odds are that the upcoming ring will be a bad
one, not a good one.

7.6.1 – On Defense, Freeing the Queen

The opportunity to free one’s Queen with a defensive ring
rarely occurs, but when it does it usually changes the
outcome of the game. When a Queen is under attack and
a well placed ring frees her to escape, the momentum
shifts dramatically.
The first game to examine is HV-jimbly-ringersoll-201011-28-1500. White has a very strong attack in the works.
In fact, in each of the past three turns White has threatened
to win and has forced Black into a very defensive role.
Figure 7.6.1 shows the position as the tide prepares to
turn on a well placed defensive ring. On turn 38 Black
jumps in with Hopper #3 forming the ring. To break the
ring and keep Black Ant #3 and Black Hopper #2 pinned,
White jumps out with Hopper #2. But now, the Black
Queen is free to move. She will slide over and form a
second ring!

Figure 7.6.1
38 bG3 wA2\
39 wG2 wS1-

39
38

S

Page 105

Chapter 7.6 – Making a Ring
This second ring is shown in Figure 7.6.2. There is,
however, a major difference between the two positions.
In the first figure, the Black Queen is surrounded by five
bugs, one more and the game is over. But now, she is only
surrounded by three bugs. Even though a fourth bug will
soon attack, this difference of only one bug means the
difference between victory and defeat.

Figure 7.6.3 shows White Hopper #2 jumping back into
attacking position. But the damage has already been done.
Now freed by the ring, Black Ant #3 swings around the
hive and pins White Ant #2. Black can now safely begin
bringing in the two Beetles from the reserve, and with two
Ants free and the two Beetles coming in, Black won fairly
easily in just a few more moves.

The next example of a good defensive ring leading to a
Queen escape is U!HV-robodino-ringersoll-2011-01-020110. In this game the escaping Black Queen actually
delivers the game ending blow! Follow along with the
next few diagrams.

Play Hive® Like a Champion
Figure 7.6.2
40 bQ wA2-

40

S
Figure 7.6.3
41 wG2 wS2\
42 bA3 \wA2
42

41

S
Figure 7.6.4
24 bA2 bS124

Black makes the ring in Figure 7.6.4. The Black Queen is
not freed by the ring, but she will be shortly. The only bug
actually freed by the ring is Black Hopper #1, but Black
has no need to hurry and jump out with this defending
bug.
S

Page 106

by Randy Ingersoll
White chooses to attack with Hopper #1 (Figure 7.6.5).
In order to keep the White Queen from escaping, Black
advances with Beetle #1 on turn 26.

Chapter 7.6 – Making a Ring
Figure 7.6.5
25 wG1 /wS2
26 bB1 -wQ

26

25

Still on the attack, White places Hopper #2 on turn 27 as
shown in Figure 7.6.6 and Black finally breaks the ring
by moving Hopper #1 on turn 28.

S
Figure 7.6.6
27 wG2 wS228 bG1 bB1\
27

28

As can be seen in Figure 7.6.7, White Hopper #2 is now
useless. The only space that Hopper #2 can get to is
space A but moving into space A would be suicide. In the
actual game, White chose to bring a Beetle in from the
reserve, totally missing the Black Queen sliding over into
space A for the win!
Watch for positions where a well executed ring
will force a Queen escape. These positions are
rare in games between experienced Hive® players,
but when they do occur, they usually result in
victory for the ring maker!

S
Figure 7.6.7
29 wB1 /wG1
30 bQ bA2\

A

30

B

29

S

Page 107

Chapter 7.6 – Making a Ring

Play Hive® Like a Champion

7.6.2 – On Defense, Freeing a
Defender

More common than a ring that frees a Queen to escape, is
a ring releasing a defender of the Queen. The following
three examples show how this can be done.

Figure 7.6.8
38 bG2 bB1/

Due to the fact that they can easily be blocked, Ants
typically make very poor defenders. This means that an
Ant release by a ring is even rarer than a Queen release by
a ring. But in the game HV-roman65-ringersoll-2010-1108-1128 Black Ant #3 is released by a well played ring.
In Figure 7.6.8 Black Hopper #2 jumps over the White
Queen into a ring.

The only way that the Black Ant can be kept in place is by
a block by either of the two White Ants. But doing this
removes a White attacker and gives Black a valuable
tempo. Black Spider #2, Black Ant #2, and Black
Beetle #1 are all poised to attack the White Queen. The
result was an easy win for Black.

38

S

S

S
Figure 7.6.9
46 bA2 bG3-

In the game U!HV-DrRaven-ringersoll-2011-05-29-1857,
White is on the verge of victory, needing only one more
bug to win. Black makes the ring shown in Figure 7.6.9
and nothing can stop the release of Black Hopper #1.

Just like the previous example, the well placed ring forces
the release of an otherwise pinned defending bug and the
ring maker, in this case Black, defends successfully. With
two bugs in reserve, Black will soon counter attack
(Chapter 7.4 – Counter Attack) and eventually win.

Page 108

46

L

by Randy Ingersoll
Another game between DrRaven and the author showing
a ring release is U!HV-DrRaven-ringersoll-2011-04-300238. In this game, Black releases not one, but two,
defending Hoppers. Figure 7.6.10 shows the gamewinning ring.

Chapter 7.6 – Making a Ring
Figure 7.6.10
34 bA1 bA3\
35 wB1 wG2
36 bG1 wL1/

Black Ant #1 moves in on turn 34 to make the ring. White
Beetle #1, released when the Black Ant left its pinning
position, advances toward the attack. But Black
Hopper #1 has been freed and jumps out on turn 36.

36

A

35
34

Black Hopper #1, jumping into a fill position, has
now freed Hopper #2, which then hops out on turn 38
(Figure 7.6.11). As is often the case, the attacker, White in
this game, is on the verge of winning. White Beetle #2,
already up on the hive, is the potential game winner. But
the ring made by Black Ant #1 freed first one Hopper and
then the other and Black went on to win.

L
Figure 7.6.11
37 wB2 bQ
38 bG2 bA1\

38
Q
G

Ladybugs are particularly well suited for this type
of defense and release by ring. Figure 7.6.12 shows the
position late in the game HV-DrRaven-ringersoll-201101-18-0249. Black has just brought in Ant #3 from the
reserve, directly into a ring making position. The newly
formed ring frees the defending Ladybug which not only
jumps out, but heads toward space A and a Black victory.
Ring making when used in conjunction with well
placed Queen defenders is a game-winning tactic.
Learn to recognize these opportunities and win!

37

L
Figure 7.6.12
34 bA3 bA134

A

S

LM

Page 109

Chapter 7.6 – Making a Ring

7.6.3 – On Offense

The prime reason that ring making is dangerous lies in the
fact that the player making a ring usually frees many of
the bugs in the ring. A bug that was pinned before the ring
was formed could easily now be in a position to move
without violating the One Hive rule.
Please look at Figure 7.6.13, in order to see an example
where making a ring leads to a forced win.

This position is from the game U!HV-ringersollhumdeabril-2011-01-04-1137, played between two
experienced players using both Ladybug and Mosquito.
White is on the attack with only two spaces left to fill to
gain victory (space A and space B). With two free Ants
and an unplayed Ladybug, White definitely has a strong
attack, but Black’s defense seems to be solid. Black
Ant #1 has pinned White Beetle #1 and at the same time
set up a gate protecting space A. Even though access to
space B is wide open, it seems that Black has a defensible
position. And with five bugs yet to play, Black has solid
counter attack options if White’s attack fails to deliver the
win.
In actuality, White delivered the knockout blow by
forming a ring! Moving White Ant #2 into space C, White
forms a ring freeing White Beetle #1.

The newly freed Beetle will soon climb atop White Ant #1
and there is no way to stop it from moving down into
space A. White continued by placing the Ladybug in the
space vacated by White Ant #2 and there was no defense
(Figure 7.6.14).

Note also that if Black Beetle #1 had not been placed,
Black Ant #1 could swing around and pin White Beetle #1
and stop its advance. But in so doing, the Black Ant would
have opened the gate to space A and the White Ant would
be able to move right in.

Page 110

Play Hive® Like a Champion

Figure 7.6.13
35 wA2 wS1/
C
A

35

B

LM
Figure 7.6.14
36 bS1 \bA2
37 wL1 /wS2
38 bS1 \wA2
39 wB1 wA1
38

36

A

39

B

37

LM

by Randy Ingersoll
Once in a while one comes across the opportunity for a
ring that prompts a single move that is both offensive and
defensive! The game HV-albedo-ringersoll-2010-09-142230 demonstrates this in Figure 7.6.15.

Chapter 7.6 – Making a Ring
Figure 7.6.15
71 bS1 wB2/

With the move 71 bS1 wB2/ Black accomplishes
three very important things. First, another space is filled
attacking the White Queen. Second, the White Queen is
now surrounded and cannot escape. And third, this move
forms a ring and releases Black Hopper #1. Soon now,
Black Hopper #1 will jump into space A, clearing a space
next to the Black Queen (defense) while filling a space
next to the White Queen (offense).

A
G

71

This was truly an offensive/defensive ring formation. And
it led to a well earned victory for Black.
When circumstances are right, an offensive ring
can be a very strong attacking tactic. Watch for
these circumstances and you can continue your
winning ways.

S

7.6.4 – Neutral Rings

One of the strengths of properly planned rings is that in
most cases your opponent is forced to react. The player
being forced to react is no longer in control. It is natural,
then, that when your opponent makes a ring, you react and
break the ring.

This however is not always the case. In the game U!HVcesc-ringersoll-2010-10-03-1513, pictured in the next two
figures, White forms what will be called a Neutral Ring.
It is not bad like most rings, nor is it good like the rings
discussed earlier. It is neutral. The danger with this type of
ring is that when presented with it, the natural tendency is
to automatically respond. This will usually result in an
unnecessary loss of tempo.
In Figure 7.6.16 White Spider #2 comes in from the
reserve and immediately forms a ring. Black does not
panic and react to the ring. But instead just brings in
another bug, Black Spider #2.

Figure 7.6.16
29 wS2 wB1/
30 bS2 bA3/

30

29

S

Page 111

Chapter 7.6 – Making a Ring
In Figure 7.6.17 White is desperately trying to save the
game. The ring formed by White Ant #2 threatens to
releases White Beetle #1. But this Beetle is too far away
to affect the outcome. Because of this, Black ignores the
ring and continues with the winning assault.

Play Hive® Like a Champion
Figure 7.6.17
67 wA2 bG2/
68 bB1 bA2\

Not all rings require an immediate response. Plan
carefully when presented with any ring. It may
prove to be a neutral ring; if so, it can be ignored.

7.6.5 – Conclusion
“Rings are bad” should always be your primary
thought. But as discussed in this chapter, some
rings are beneficial. Study these examples, replay
other games, watch for rings, both good and bad,
and your Hive® skills will continue to improve.

Page 112

Q

67

68
B

S

by Randy Ingersoll

Chapter 7.7 – Playing for a Draw

Chapter 7.7 – Playing for a Draw
“A half of a loaf is better than no loaf at all” says an old
proverb, and that also applies in the game of Hive®. There are
times when a player may be happy for a draw and other times
when a player actively seeks out a draw. A lower rated player
playing in a ranked game against a higher rated player might
seek the draw knowing that a draw will increase his rating.
Or playing Black in a tournament game against an equally
matched player, one might be content to play for a draw. But
more commonly, during a game, when the opposing player
has an extremely strong attack going and a loss looks
inevitable, a draw might be a preferable conclusion.

Referring back to the basic rules, a draw occurs in one of
three circumstances. The first is when neither player has the
strength necessary to bring about a win. The second situation
is when a player on the defense can thwart each attack by his
opponent but cannot seize the initiative himself, resulting in a
repetition of position. And finally, a draw results when the
Queens are in close proximity and the final move surrounds
both Queens simultaneously.
When playing face to face, the players can agree to a draw at
any time. But when playing online at BoardSpace, the players
must repeat the position three times to have the program
recognize the draw.
Let’s see what tactics one might use when playing for a draw.

Figure 7.7.1

7.7.1 – Stretching the Hive

It takes six bugs to surround the Queen. When a player no
longer has enough mobile bugs to do the job, victory is more
than likely out of reach. When both players find themselves in
this same predicament a draw is the inevitable conclusion.

An example of this is in Figure 7.7.1, showing the final
position in a game (HV-cesc-ringersoll-2010-10-09-2205) in
which the hive was stretched to the point where a draw was
the only possible result. Notice two things that led to this
draw. There are long strings of pinned bugs with very few
mobile bugs on either side and both Queens are safely
positioned along the outer reaches of the hive.

G

A

B

S

Page 113

Chapter 7.7 – Playing for a Draw
Let’s examine two points in the game where the hive was
stretched. In Figure 7.7.2 we see early in the game when the
placement of White Beetle #1 allowed Black Ant #2 to pin a
string of three White bugs. At this point both Queens are still
mobile and both players have strings of three bugs pinned by
the opponent!

Play Hive® Like a Champion
Figure 7.7.2
13 wB1 /wS1
14 bA1 /wB1

On turn 35 (in Figure 7.7.3), White moves Hopper #2
into position to go to space A, possibly executing a pin
replacement to free Ant #3. If Ant #3 were to become free to
move, all three of the White Ants would be free and White
would have winning chances. Black does not have much
choice. He must hop out with Hopper #1 and pin White
Ant #3. At the same time, this creates a string of pinned bugs.
If you are playing for a draw, learn to stretch the
hive and maximize the chances to earn half a point.

7.7.2 – Compact Queens

13

14

S
Figure 7.7.3
35 wG2 bS1\
36 bG1 wA3\

The second clue to a likely drawn position is the close
proximity of the opposing Queens. When the Queens are
close enough (either adjacent or just one space apart) that the
final move surrounding one Queen also surrounds the other, a
draw occurs. We will now examine a game between two
Hive® Masters that ends in a draw due to a compact Queen
formation. This game (U!HV-Eucalyx-ringersoll-2011-02-132216) is very instructional for its thrust-counter thrust,
attack-defend series of moves leading up to the draw.

36

A

A

Take a look at Figure 7.7.4 as Black sets the mood for the
game by deciding on turn 14 to aggressively attack rather than
to attempt to defend. And as we shall soon see, the game is
going to pivot around space A, the space between the two
Queens.

35

B

S
Figure 7.7.4
14 bS1 -wQ
14

A

LM

Page 114

by Randy Ingersoll

Chapter 7.7 – Playing for a Draw

Figure 7.7.5
19 wL1 wA2/
20 bA2 /wG1

Figure 7.7.6
21 wA3 wS1\
22 bL1 wA1\

19

21

A
A
20

22

LM

Figure 7.7.5 shows a few moves later with White continuing
to bring in more attacking bugs. Now Black has little choice
but to play some defense. Turn 20 is important for Black
because it pins the well placed defensive White Hopper #1.

LM
Figure 7.7.7
23 wL1 wG1B

23

After attacking with Ant #3 on turn 21 (Figure 7.7.6), White’s
Ladybug threatens to win immediately by moving into the
critical space A. This forces one of the Black defenders to
jump out. In this case the Black Ladybug is the only one of
the two defenders that is free to move.

In Figure 7.7.7 White forces the Ladybug into attacking
position and now, with two Hoppers in reserve, White is in a
strong position to win. A White Hopper brought into either
space B or space C will be in position to win with a hop into
space A.

Black’s defense on turn 24, depicted in Figure 7.7.8, is to use
a fill (Chapter 6.4) to free the Black Mosquito, the
remaining defender. White brings in Hopper #2 in position to
attack and the Black Mosquito jumps out (turn 26).
In jumping out, it opens a space adjacent to the Black Queen,
pins White Ant #1, and converts (Chapter 7.13 – Mosquito
Conversion) its own movement to that of an Ant!

A

C

LM
Figure 7.7.8
24 bL1 wL1\
25 wG2 wA2/
26 bM1 wA1-

25

A
26

24

LM

Page 115

Chapter 7.7 – Playing for a Draw

Play Hive® Like a Champion

Figure 7.7.9
27 wG3 wS128 bB1 bS1/

Figure 7.7.10
29 wG3 bQ\
30 bM1 bS1\

27

28

29

A

A
B

30

LM

When, in Figure 7.7.9, the third White Hopper enters the
game on turn 27, it is also immediately in threatening
position; this time threatening space B. Black aggressively
moves in with Beetle #1 on turn 28. And now both players are
attacking!

LM
Figure 7.7.11
31 wG3 /bL1
32 bB1 wQ
32

In Figure 7.7.10 White completes the plan with White
Hopper #3 attacking the Black Queen. Black counters the
White threat by moving the Black Mosquito as shown. Now,
if White Hopper #2 jumps into space A, the game is a draw.

Not yet satisfied with a draw, White Hopper #3 pins the Black
Ladybug on turn 31 (Figure 7.7.11) and at the same time free
a spot for White Ant #1 to attack if need be. Now that there is
no White threat to win, Black can execute a Beetle cover
(Chapter 6.2). This now frees a space for a direct drop of a
new Black bug adjacent to the White Queen.
White Hopper #1, the only White defender, now converts
to attack and White is again threatening to win. This
forces Black back into defensive mode as Ant #2 pins White
Hopper #2 (Figure 7.7.12).

A

Q

31

LM
Figure 7.7.12
33 wG1 bQ\
34 bA2 wG2/
34

A

Q

33

LM

Page 116

by Randy Ingersoll

Chapter 7.7 – Playing for a Draw

Figure 7.7.13
35 wL1 bA1\
36 bA2 bB1\

Figure 7.7.14
37 wL1 bA238 bA3 bS1/
38

36

Q

A

Q

C

37

35 B

LM

A bug finally occupies space A in Figure 7.7.13. White’s next
threat to win is Ant #1 moving into space B. Now that space A
is occupied and White Hopper #2 is no longer a danger, Black
Ant #2 moves into space C. With this move, Black places a
block on space B and finally threatens to win himself.

LM
Figure 7.7.15
39 wG2 bA1\
39

In Figure 7.7.14, the White Ladybug moves back to space B,
Black Ant #3 enters the game adjacent to the Beetle covered
White Queen, and a draw is inevitable. Neither of the two
players has a defending bug that could vacate a space and
both players have bugs in position to move into space A. The
only possibility of a victory is if either player can execute a
squeeze (Chapter 7.8). But as soon as one player makes a
viable threat to begin a squeeze, the other will end the game
by occupying space A and taking the draw.

A

Q

LM

With the draw virtually certain, White ends it with Hopper #2
moving into space A (Figure 7.7.15).
What an exciting game of attack, defense, and
counter attack this was! A classic draw brought
about by compact Queens.

Figure 7.7.16
42 bB1 bB2/

7.7.3 – Forced Draw

Sometimes a player has no choice. It’s “take the draw or
lose.” This may occur even in a situation where without the
immediate threat by the opponent the game is won.

A

42

G

S

Page 117

Chapter 7.7 – Playing for a Draw
The game used as an example (U!HV-Eucalyx-ringersoll2010-08-22-1100) was previously discussed in Chapter 7.1 –
Counting Bugs. Now we will look at the final few moves
where the only choice that Black has is to take the draw.

In Figure 7.7.16 (page 117), Black Beetle #1 climbs off the
White Queen into position for Black to threaten to win by
moving Ant #2 into space A. This moved was forced because
if Black does anything else, White Beetle #1 will cover the
Black Beetle and Black would not have enough bugs to even
threaten to win.

Play Hive® Like a Champion
Figure 7.7.17
43 wA3 bA2/
44 bG2 wQ/

43

G

White’s response in Figure 7.7.17 is also forced. The only
other way to stop Black Ant #2 is a pin by White Ant #2. But
this would release Black Ant #3!

44

B

Black counters by hopping Hopper #2 as shown on turn 44.
Now Black threatens to win with Beetle #2 moving into
space B! And again, White has only one response, pinning the
Black Beetle with Ant #3. Black Ant #3 is also in position to
move into space B. And just like before, White Ant #2 must
be left in place.

S

Black has nothing better to do than repeat the same threat.
White has nothing better to do than repeat the same defense,
and the result is a draw.
Another example comes from the game HV-ringersollDragonfly-2010-11-23-0313. In Figure 7.7.18 by moving
Ant #2 into space A, Black releases Hopper #3 with a fill.
White is forced to shift the pin to space B (turn 35). And now
Black can force the draw by moving Ant #2 to space C. This
continual threat of releasing Black Hopper #3 by a fill, forces
a repetition of positions and therefore a draw. Unfortunately,
Black declined the sure draw, continued to play for a win, and
ended up losing!
When on defense, there are times when all you can
hope for is a draw. Watch for these opportunities to
force the draw because after all, “a half loaf is better
than no loaf!”

7.7.4 – Conclusion
In some circumstances a Hive® player will be happy
with just a draw. A true Hive® Master knows how to
recognize these circumstances, ‘Play for a Draw,’
and earn a half point.
Page 118

Figure 7.7.18
34 bA2 /wA1
35 wA1 bG3/
35

B
A

C

34

Q

S

by Randy Ingersoll

Chapter 7.8 – The Squeeze

Chapter 7.8 – The Squeeze
According to the rules, if a player has a legal move, he must
make it. This rule applies even if making a move would
immediately end the game in the favor of the opponent, place
the opponent in a position to win, or free your opponent’s
Queen to escape.
When a player forces his opponent into making a move that is
damaging to his own cause, this is called the Squeeze.
A player is squeezed into making a move that he would
rather not make.

7.8.1 – Winning a Drawn Game

This tactic is most commonly seen when the two Queens are
in close proximity and the final move by either player would
force a draw by simultaneously surrounding both Queens.
In many cases, a player may be happy with a draw (Chapter
7.7 – Playing for a Draw). For example, a lower rated player
may be happy for a draw against a higher rated one. After
fighting a strong defensive struggle a player may willingly
take a draw. Or, finally, a player may be satisfied with a draw
when playing Black.

An experienced Hive® player, however, will look for the
opportunity to use a squeeze and pull out the win. Follow
along in game HV-meche5-ringersoll-2010-09-20-2243 as we
show the attack/defense/counter attack that culminates in the
Squeeze and a win for Black.

Let’s start with Figure 7.8.1 and review the situation in a
game of Standard Hive ®, with no optional bugs. White
has pressed the attack and has five bugs around the Black
Queen. The only real candidate to fill the final spot is White
Beetle #1, but it is currently pinned by Black Ant #3. It is
interesting to note that Black also has a strong attack. The
White Queen is covered by Black Beetle #1, has three spots
occupied, and no defenders. Quite an offensive game!
As we pick up with turn 47, White, attempting to win the
game by forcing the Beetle free, has formed an offensive ring
(Section 7.6.3 – Making a Ring – On Offense). Realizing that
there is no way to stop White Beetle #1 from being freed,
Black counters in turn 48 by moving Beetle #1 into space A
to defend against the impending approach of the White
Beetle.

Figure 7.8.1
47 wS1 wS2\
48 bB1 wA2/

Q

A

48
G

47

S

Page 119

Chapter 7.8 – The Squeeze
A few turns later, Figure 7.8.2 shows as White Beetle #1
approaches and moves into position for the possible victory.
Unfortunately for White, with both Black Beetles well placed
for defense, it doesn’t matter whether White Beetle #1 goes
straight for the final space as shown or takes the longer, more
circuitous route over White Beetle #2 and the Black Queen.
In either case, a Black Beetle stands ready to defend.
On turn 52 (also in Figure 7.8.2) Black Beetle #1 covers
White Beetle #1.

Play Hive® Like a Champion
Figure 7.8.2
51 wB1 wG1
52 bB1 wB1

G

51

At this point, baring a colossal mistake by Black, the best
White can aim for is a draw. There are not enough White bugs
in position to force a victory. But the close proximity of the
two Queens makes a draw highly possible.
On turn 53 in Figure 7.8.3, White attempts to provide an
escape for the White Queen by moving Ant #1 to space A, but
Black counters by blocking with Black Hopper #2 moving
into space B. At the same time, this Hopper move is creating
a threat for Black to win. This forces White to move Ant #1
back from where it came (turn 55).

G

52

S
Figure 7.8.3
53 wA1 wQ/
54 bG2 wA2/
55 wA1 wB2-

A
53

B
G

B
G

55
54

In moves 56 through 60, Black performs a pin replacement
(Section 6.1.2 – The Pin – Replacing a Pin) while White
unsuccessfully attempts to free a second Ant. Figure 7.8.4
shows the position after Black’s 60th move. Black Ant #2 is
now free!

S
Figure 7.8.4
60 bG3 wA3-

60

G
B
G

S

Page 120

by Randy Ingersoll
The two players continue to spar back and forth, finally
leading to a squeeze as shown in Figure 7.8.5. Black’s turn
72 pins White Spider #2 and now White is in the Squeeze.
There are three White bugs that are free to move. All three
mobile bugs are adjacent to the Black Queen; moving any of
them opens a space and allows Black to win. If Ant #2 or
Hopper #3 moves, Beetle #1 jumps down into Space A and
Black wins. The only defense against Black Beetle #1 is a
cover by White Beetle #2. But, if White chooses that defense,
Black Beetle #2 will win in two moves.

Chapter 7.8 – The Squeeze
Figure 7.8.5
72 bA3 wS2\

A

B
G

G

By effectively using a squeeze, Black has turned a potential
draw into a well fought victory.

72

A second example should suffice to get across the basic
concept of a squeeze. In Figure 7.8.6 we have a situation late
in the game U!HV-ringersoll-DrRaven-2011-02-07-2248 that
should be, at first glance, an easy win for White. Black is
shutout (Chapter 7.5) and White only needs three bugs to win.
With two attacking Beetles (one already atop the hive and the
other ready to climb up), a Hopper in position to attack, and a
Ladybug in reserve, it would seem that White will have an
easy time of it. But with the Queens occupying adjacent
spaces and the White Queen partially surrounded, a draw will
occur unless White can use a squeeze.

S
Figure 7.8.6
44 wB2 wG1/

44

B

LM

Page 121

Chapter 7.8 – The Squeeze
White proceeds carefully in turns 45 through 49, moving
both Beetles and Hopper #2 into position, culminating
in turn 50 in Figure 7.8.7. By this move, White
accomplishes two things. First, the fifth space around the
Black Queen is occupied, but more importantly, Black
Beetle #2 is now free to move. By Hive® rules, Black is
squeezed and must make a move.

Play Hive® Like a Champion
Figure 7.8.7
50 wB2 wQ/
51 bB2 wQ

By moving Black Beetle #2, one of the spaces adjacent to
the White Queen will be vacated. With an open space
adjacent to his Queen, White safely wins the game with
White Beetle #1 coming down into space A!

51

These two games demonstrate good examples of a
squeeze turning a drawn position into a victory.

7.8.2 – Opening a Gate

Another useful use of a squeeze is to force open a
gate, thereby defeating a defending block. Figure 7.8.8
illustrates just such a use in the game HV-Fumanchuringersoll-2010-10-07-2321. Black Ant #3 has placed a
block defending space B. Neither of the two White
Beetles can successfully attack this space because they are
both tied down covering the two defending Black Beetles.
To win, White must open the gate and uses a squeeze to
do so.

50
Q

A

LM
Figure 7.8.8
57 wA1 /bA1

C

Page 122

B

B

Turn 57 is a waiting move by Ant #1. Having only one
mobile bug, Black must move Ant #3 and the gate is open!
White brings in either of the two mobile Ants and then
wins with White Beetle #1 delivering the final stroke into
space C.
Learn to use the Squeeze, it can and will be your
friend.

L

B

A

57

S

by Randy Ingersoll

7.8.3 – Releasing a Pin

In an endgame position when a valuable bug is pinned, it
may be possible to release the pin by using a squeeze.
Here is an example from the game U!HV-weronikaringersoll-2010-12-08-2255.

Chapter 7.8 – The Squeeze

Figure 7.8.9
55 wS1 \wG1

With only Spider #1 free to move, White did not have
much choice. He moved as shown in Figure 7.8.9. This
freed the Black Ladybug and Black won easily. The Black
Ladybug attacks into space A and Black Beetle #2 finishes
the game with an attack into space B.
With proper application of a squeeze, a pinned
bug can be brought back into play and have an
influence on the game’s outcome.

7.8.4 – Freeing Your Queen

A fourth use of a squeeze is demonstrated in the 2011
BoardSpace Tournament semi-final game, T!HVEddyMarlo-DrRaven-2011-06-28-1708. Two-time
defending champion EddyMarlo shows his skill, using a
squeeze to force a victory.

Beginning with Figure 7.8.10 we see how this comes
about. White’s Queen is almost surrounded, all Black
needs to do to win is fill one more space. However, there
is no bug available to accomplish that seemingly easy feat.
Black, in effect, is playing for the draw.

A

55

B

L

B

LM
Figure 7.8.10
63 wB1 bG2

A

63
B

L

Page 123

Chapter 7.8 – The Squeeze
In Figure 7.8.11 because moving Hopper #3 will allow
the White Queen to escape, Black is forced to move
Spider #1. White responds by pinning with White Ant #1.

Play Hive® Like a Champion
Figure 7.8.11
64 bS1 wL165 wA1 bS165
64

G

Now, as we see in Figure 7.8.12, Black is squeezed. The
only bug able to move is Black Hopper #3. When it moves
as shown, the White Queen escapes, and White has an
easy win.
Proper use of a squeeze can gain freedom for
your Queen and lead to victory.

A

L
Figure 7.8.12
66 bG3 bB1/
67 wQ /bQ

G

A

67

7.8.5 – Conclusion
Learn to use the Squeeze and you can turn a
position that may seem to be a hopeless draw
into a well earned victory. Control the outside
of the hive, attack the Queen, and ‘Squeeze’
out a victory.

Page 124

66

L

by Randy Ingersoll

Chapter 7.9 – The Hop Around

Chapter 7.9 – The Hop Around
The Hopper is an important bug in the hive. Many games end
when a Hopper jumps in from the outer edges of the hive and
fills the game-winning space around the opposing Queen. The
ability to get into inaccessible spaces and its unlimited range
make the Hopper an extremely important and potent weapon.
With the strength of its long range ability, however, comes a
weakness. With the Hopper limited to straight line movement
it is critical to get the Hopper placed into proper attacking
position. If not, it may not be able to reach its final
destination.
The basic concept of the Hop Around is to not be limited in
planning the Hopper placement, but to look into the future
and see how a Hopper that cannot reach a specific space in
one move might be able to reach it in two or three moves.

Figure 7.9.1
33 wG2 \wA1

33

7.9.1 – Basic Hop Around

The first example is a basic hop around from the game U!HVringersoll-guest-2011-06-07-2237. As shown in Figure 7.9.1,
White has just brought in Hopper #2. At first glance, it may
seem that the Hopper’s goal is to reach space B, but that is not
the case. Space B can be reached by any one of a group of
White bugs. Before the Hopper placement, White had three
Ants and a Beetle that all could reach space B. Black cannot
protect the space with a block, nor can a Black Beetle arrive
fast enough to cover White Beetle #2. Space B is not the
problem space. Space A is the problem space.
Thus, the ultimate goal for White Hopper #2 is to reach
space A, the space that is very well defended by the block by
Black Spider #1.

Figure 7.9.2 shows White Hopper #2 reaching its final
destination. And even though defending Black Hopper #1 can
jump out, there is no way for Black to prevent a White Ant
from moving into space B followed by White Beetle #2 into
the space vacated by the Black Hopper.
White wins and demonstrates the value of a hop around.

Q
G

A

B

S
Figure 7.9.2
37 wG2 \wB1

Q
G

37 B

S

Page 125

Chapter 7.9 – The Hop Around
Another instructive example of a hop around can be found in
the game HV-Fumanchu-ringersoll-2010-11-12-1120. In this
case, the hop around is executed early in the game, but still
shows how to get a Hopper indirectly into an attacking
position.

Play Hive® Like a Champion
Figure 7.9.3
23 wG2 \wQ
23

B

White Hopper #2 enters the game as shown in Figure 7.9.3,
with the goal of reaching space B by first moving into
space A.
A basic hop around gets a Hopper indirectly into an
attacking position. Look for these opportunities when
it seems impossible for a Hopper to make a direct
attack.

A

LM

7.9.2 – Complex Hop Around

U!HV-ringersoll-Fumanchu-2011-05-08-1829 shows two
Hoppers working together to perform a more complex hop
around.

In Figure 7.9.4 we see White bringing in Hopper #2 in order
to execute a basic hop around by jumping, first to space A,
and then to space B. This will be followed by White Beetle #2
winning by moving into space A. Black responds by bringing
Beetle #1 into position to defend by covering Hopper #2 after
it lands in space A.
We see this plan unfolding in Figure 7.9.5 (page 127). But
here comes the second hop around, this time by White
Hopper #1. White Hopper #1 jumps first into space C and
then into space B.

Black resigns in the final position shown in Figure 7.9.6
(page 127). Nothing can stop White Hopper #1 from going
into space B.
A simple hop around is quite often easy to see.
Master Hive® players, however, can find the complex,
game-winning ones!

Page 126

Figure 7.9.4
35 wG2 /wG1
36 bB1 wQ

36

A

B

G

35

L

by Randy Ingersoll

Chapter 7.9 – The Hop Around

Figure 7.9.5
37 wG2 wG1/
38 bB1 wG2

Figure 7.9.6
Final Position and White’s Game Winning Threat

C

B

Q 38

B

Q
G

G

37

L

7.9.3 – Planning the Hop Around

A master Hive ® player plans many moves in advance.
Nowhere is this more important than planning for a hop
around. In the game U!HV-ringersoll-cesc-2010-09-18-1355,
White is looking well into the future when playing for a
Hopper pin replacement (Section 6.1.2 – Replacing a Pin).

Examining Figure 7.9.7, we see that White’s immediate focus
must be on defense. Black not only has two bugs (Hopper #3
and Beetle #2) directly threatening the White Queen but also
has two Ants in reserve. It is vital that the White Ants be ready
for the upcoming defensive needs. So, as we see, White
begins a pin replacement on turn 25. Even though the White
counter attack is still far in the future the placement of the
White Hopper is such that by the series of moves shown, it
can reach space A.

L

Figure 7.9.7
25 wG2 /wA1

A

G

25

S

Page 127

Chapter 7.9 – The Hop Around
The game has continued. With three mobile Ants,
White has defended well and thwarted the Black
offensive efforts.

Play Hive® Like a Champion
Figure 7.9.8
51 wG3 /wG2

Figure 7.9.8 picks up the game as White begins the
counter attack and assault on the Black Queen.

B
51 Q

B

A

The purpose of the preparatory White Hopper move in
turn 51 is apparent when one realizes that if White
Hopper #2 were to immediately jump into space A
(Figure 7.9.9), two unpleasant situations would result.
First and most important, Black Hopper #1, which is
currently defending the Black Queen, would be free to
jump out. And by jumping to space C, the Black
Hopper would free Black Beetle #2! In the meantime,
White Hopper #2 would be pinned by Black
Spider #2. And with the space previously occupied by
Black Hopper #1 now vacant, the White Hopper
would no longer be in position to attack the Black
Queen. But that is not all, at some later time, after the
Black Beetle #2 has covered the White Queen
to render it immobile, Black Spider #2 would be in
position to move into space D and attack the White
Queen.
Good planning early can lead to a victory
producing, endgame hop around.

Page 128

S
Figure 7.9.9
alt 51 wG2 wG1\
alt 52 bG1 -bG2

Q

C

B

52

D

51

S

by Randy Ingersoll

7.9.4 – Other Uses for the Hop Around

In most cases a hop around is used to get a Hopper into
position to attack the Queen. But there are other situations
where a hop around can be used to improve a Hopper’s
position for other reasons. In the game U!HV-weronikaringersoll-2010-12-11-1459, a hop around is used as a pin
replacement, freeing an Ant for more beneficial use
elsewhere.

Chapter 7.9 – The Hop Around

Figure 7.9.10
36 bG1 wL1/

A

36

Notice how in Figure 7.9.10 Black Hopper #1 has moved into
position to continue into space A and replace the pin on White
Ant #3. This would allow Black Ant #1 to join the attack at
the other end of the hive.

Another common use for the hop around is to get a Hopper
into position for a fill (Chapter 6.4). In the game HVBlackMagic-ringersoll-2010-10-31-1413, BlackMagic turns
what may look like a lost position into a victory with a three
move hop around (and a little help from Black). Follow along
starting with Figure 7.9.11.

When looking at this initial position and counting bugs, it
may seem that White has no chance to win. White needs two
bugs to win, but only has one bug, Beetle #2, available. But
White has a plan focusing on using a hop around.

LM
Figure 7.9.11
44 bB2 bG2-

G

44

LM

Page 129

Chapter 7.9 – The Hop Around
While Black Beetle #2 executes a Queen cover, White begins
the hop around in Figure 7.9.12. White has no defensive bugs
available, so with two bugs in reserve, and three free Ants,
Black’s attack will be unstoppable. White’s only chance is to
attack and to attack immediately!

Play Hive® Like a Champion
Figure 7.9.12
45 wG3 wG1\
46 bB2 bG2
47 wG3 wA2/
48 bB2 wQ

With the formation of a ring on turn 47, as shown in this
figure, White Hopper #1 is free to attack. But that just trades
one Hopper for another and does not gain anything for White.

So White continues as shown in Figure 7.9.13. The hop
around is complete and the White Ladybug is free to move.
She can attack into any of the three labeled spaces. Black
meanwhile has completely overlooked the dangerous threat
and continues to attack. (In this game Black completely
missed an opportunity to win. Can you find the move that
could have won for Black?)
White forces the win with the next move by first moving the
Ladybug into space A. This performs another fill. White
Hopper #2 cannot be stopped from jumping into space B and
leading by one tempo, White wins the race to the finish.

45

G

47

Q

48

LM
Figure 7.9.13
49 wG3 bM150 bG3 bB2-

Watch for opportunities like these to use a hop
around. You can find victories just around the
corner.

A
49

7.9.5 – Conclusion
The Hop Around is a tactic that good Hive® players
learn to master. Opportunities exist throughout the
game to produce excellent results using this versatile
tool.

Page 130

46

B
G

C

Q

50

LM

by Randy Ingersoll

Chapter 7.10 – Two Beetle Attack

Chapter 7.10 – Two Beetle Attack
The Beetle can be one of the most powerful
bugs in the hive. When free to move about
across the top of the hive, a Beetle can wreak
havoc. Place two Beetles atop the hive (or three
if playing with the Mosquito) and there is a good
probability that you will be able to win the
game.

7.10.1 – Beetle Squeeze

A Beetle defending the Queen can be a very
formidable defense. In some cases, having a
Beetle atop the hive is enough to pull a draw out
of a certain defeat. But attack with two Beetles,
and properly played, the solo Beetle has little
chance.

Figure 7.10.1
54 bQ wA2\

S

Here is the game (U!HV-Eucalyx-ringersoll2010-08-29-1321) in which Eucalyx taught the
author a valuable lesson regarding the value of
the Two Beetle Attack.
Figure 7.10.1 shows the position late in the
game with White on the move. It may seem
that since the Black Queen is mobile and has
Beetle #1 defending, that White does not have
the bug power available to force a victory. But
Eucalyx proves otherwise as he unleashes the
power of two Beetles atop the hive.

Step one is to free White Ant #3 from its current
pinning duties. This is done by immobilizing
Black Ant #3 with a Beetle cover. Step two is to
pin the Black Queen and thus squeeze Black
Beetle #1, forcing it to move. This will free
White Hopper #1 which is currently being
covered by the Black Beetle. Step three is to
bring White Spider #2 around the hive to pin
Black Ant #3 and release White Beetle #2 to join
the attack. Figure 7.10.2 shows the position
after turn 77 when White has completed each of
these three preliminary steps.

G
A

54

S
Figure 7.10.2
77 wS2 wB2\

G

77
A

Q

S

Page 131

Chapter 7.10 – Two Beetle Attack
Now White implements the Two Beetle Attack.
While Black has no choice but to mindlessly
move Black Beetle #1, the two White Beetles
force the Black Beetle into an untenable
position.(See Figure 7.10.3.) When White
approaches with Beetle #2, Black has no choice
but to cover. White then covers with Beetle #1
and Black’s goose is cooked.

Play Hive® Like a Champion
Figure 7.10.3
87 wB2 wS1
88 bB1 wB2

G

87

S

88
G

Figure 7.10.4 shows the triple stack of Beetles
and the two spaces White needs to occupy in
order to win. White Beetle #1 moves down into
space A. Black Beetle #1 is uncovered and
forced to move. Wherever the Black Beetle
goes, White Beetle #2 will move into position to
take space B and win the game.

S
Figure 7.10.4
90 wB1 wA2/

90

A

S

B

B

B

Our second example comes from the game HVLony-ringersoll-2010-09-24-1107. White has
had an excellent attack, but Black has defended
well and White has now run out of attacking
bugs. Reviewing Figure 7.10.5 and counting
bugs (Chapter 7.1) we find that White has only
to fill space A in order to win. But there are no
White bugs available to do the job. By keeping
the Black Queen surrounded, White might be
able to earn the draw by forcing Black to play
into space A, surrounding both Queens at the
same time. Barring a colossal mistake by Black,
the best that White can do is to play for the draw
(Chapter 7.7).

S
Figure 7.10.5
51 wB2 bG152 bG1 -wS1

A

Q

51

52

S

Page 132

by Randy Ingersoll
But planning to effectively use two Beetles, Black has
a better idea. It starts with further restricting White’s
movement options by moving out with Hopper #1 on turn
52, as shown in Figure 7.10.5 (page 132). It continues
with Black Hopper #1 executing a pin replacement on
White Ant #2 (Section 6.1.2) and freeing Black Ant #2.

Then, as shown in Figure 7.10.6, Black Beetle #2 moves
in toward the White Beetle. The Squeeze (Chapter 7.8) is
complete as Black covers White Beetle #1 on turn 60. The
only two White bugs that can move are Beetle #2 and
Hopper #2. Moving the Hopper relieves the threat of a
draw and allows Black to continue the attack on the White
Queen. Moving the Beetle atop the White Hopper or to
space B allows the Black Queen to escape. Any other
Beetle move and the White Beetle gets covered by a
nearby Black Beetle; Black Beetle #1 if the Beetle goes to
space A, Black Beetle #2 if the White Beetle climbs atop
the Black Queen.

Chapter 7.10 – Two Beetle Attack
Figure 7.10.6
60 bB2 wB1

60
B

A

Q

B

S

In any case, the threat of a draw is over. The Two Beetle
Attack has forced a Beetle squeeze and Black wins.
These games give good examples of the Two
Beetle Attack perfectly executing the Beetle
Squeeze!

7.10.2 – Forcing the Second Beetle

Getting the second Beetle atop the hive is sometimes
not an easy matter. Watch how in this next game (HVringersoll-cesc-2010-10-09-1105), Black uses a partial
shutout (Section 7.5.2) to limit White’s mobility and then
careful Spider movement to force the second Beetle up
and into the fray. With both Beetles mobile and atop the
hive, Black had no problem winning the game.
Please examine Figure 7.10.7. Black is in control of the
game but White has defended well. Black must plan and
execute a two Beetle attack in order to force the victory.
White’s defense is three fold. First, space B is well
blocked. None of the Black Hoppers can reach this space
so the only option is a Black Beetle. Second, even though
White’s movement options are limited, White Hopper #3
and White Hopper #1 working together are well placed
defensively. If Black moves into space A with White
Hopper #3 in its current position, White Hopper #1 can
jump out and create problems by vacating another space

Figure 7.10.7
After 76 wG3 wS1\
C

76

A
Q

E

B

B
D

S

Page 133

Chapter 7.10 – Two Beetle Attack
adjacent to the White Queen. When White Hopper #3 jumps
to space C, a block is set and only a Black Beetle can reach
space A. And finally, as odd as it may seem, White Beetle #1,
even though currently covered by Black Beetle #2, is also
in a good defensive position! If the Black Beetle moves
prematurely, White Beetle #1 will be free to move. With
White Beetle #1 free to move, the effectiveness of the partial
shutout is seriously diminished.
But Black has a plan for forcing Beetle #1 atop the hive.
By moving Spider #2 to space D (Figure 7.10.7 on page 133)
and then into space E, Black Beetle #1 (currently in the
elbow) will be free to move. With both Beetles atop the hive,
Black can and did execute his attack and gained a well earned
victory.
The second example shows how, by keeping the Black Ants
busy elsewhere, White is able to force the second Beetle up
on the hive and bring about an easy victory. Figure 7.10.8
shows the situation late in the game HV-Eucalyx-ringersoll2011-01-16-2025.

When White brings Beetle #2 into the game as shown, Black
has no defense. The Beetle will climb up and over the line of
bugs and into space A. Then White Beetle #1 will climb down
into space B and White will win.

A key to this victory is White’s ability to force the exodus of
Black defenders and to keep the last remaining defender,
Black Hopper #1, pinned from two different directions. This
bidirectional pin (Section 6.1.5) means that Black would
have to create two rings in order to free the Hopper.
The attempt by Black to do that gives the White Beetle time
to enter the game and climb atop the hive. Once both White
Beetles are atop the hive, the power of the Two Beetle Attack
claims another victim.
Watch for ways to force your second Beetle up on the
hive. If you can, your win totals will go up, too!

Page 134

Play Hive® Like a Champion
Figure 7.10.8
31 wB2 wQ\

A

Q

B

31

L

by Randy Ingersoll

7.10.3 – Double Cover

Another maneuver that can be executed with two Beetles atop
the hive is the double cover. In Section 7.2.4 – Defending the
Queen – Adjacent Friendly Defenders, we saw how effective
adjacent bugs can be in defending the Queen against attack.
Two attacking Beetles can provide an excellent counter
against well placed defenders.

Chapter 7.10 – Two Beetle Attack

Figure 7.10.9
31 wB2 wB1-

In some cases the double cover will refer to the Queen and
one defender, as shown in our first game in this section. In
other cases, like the second game in this section, the double
cover will be applied to two defenders. In either case, the Two
Beetle Attack leads to the double cover which leads to victory.

Let’s pick up the game HV-ringersoll-roman65-2010-11-081116 on turn 31 in Figure 7.10.9, as White brings in the
second Beetle. White already has control of the outside of the
hive and with that control, White also has superior mobility.
But it is the double cover that brings the game to a swift
conclusion.
In Figure 7.10.10 we see both the Black Queen and an
adjacent defending Spider are covered. White’s next two
moves will see the two remaining White Hoppers drop
directly into spaces A and B. Following that, one of the White
Ants will move in and finally Beetle #2 will deliver the final
stroke.

S

31
A

S
Figure 7.10.10
35 wB2 bQ

B

Q

A

35
S

A

S

Page 135

Chapter 7.10 – Two Beetle Attack
In the next game (HV-Fumanchu-ringersoll-2011-02-262041), Fumanchu teaches ringersoll a lesson with the double
cover of two defending bugs. Please look at Figure 7.10.11.
White already has one Beetle covering the defending Black
Ladybug and with turn 25, has a plan for a double cover!

Play Hive® Like a Champion
Figure 7.10.11
25 wB2 wA2-

L

25

Figure 7.10.12 shows the game status after White has
flawlessly executed the double cover. When White brings in
Hopper #2, there is no defense. If either of the free Black Ants
pins the White Hopper, White will win. Obviously, if Black
Ant #3 abandons the Block of space A, then one of the White
Ants will move in. Not so obvious is what happens if Black
Ant #2 moves to place the pin.

If Black Ant #2 leaves its current post, White Beetle #2
cannot be stopped from moving toward and into space A.
Black Ant #2 is currently part of a pocket formed around the
Black Mosquito. And so, to keep the Black Mosquito from
moving out it must remain covered. But once Black Ant #2
moves, the pocket formation is no longer there and White
Beetle #2 will be free to move.
A double cover is an effective offensive tool. Use it
and you will continue to add to your victory total.

7.10.4 – Two Beetle Defense

As we have seen, two Beetles atop the hive are very
powerful. But there are defensive tactics that can be used to
counter this formidable attacking force.
The first, of course, is to defend in such a way that your
opponent does not have the opportunity to get two Beetles up
on the hive.

But when that is not possible look for the chance to defend
with the second: the Two Beetle Defense. Get two of your
Beetles up on the hive and in good defensive position and it
is possible to negate the power of two opposing Beetles atop
the hive!
Page 136

LM
Figure 7.10.12
33 wG2 wM134 Black resigns

33

A

L

M

LM

by Randy Ingersoll
This is demonstrated in the game U!HV-Wak-ringersoll-201309-15-0005. In Figure 7.10.13 Black surprisingly releases
White Beetle #1! This may seem like suicide because White
only has two spaces to fill around the Black Queen and now
will have a Beetle and a Mosquito atop the hive. Black,
however, has carefully calculated the defense.

Chapter 7.10 – Two Beetle Attack
Figure 7.10.13
45 wS2 -bL1
46 bA1 \wS2

46
45

B

G

We see the game a few moves later in Figure 7.10.14. Things
now looks even worse. White has two bugs up, both of which
are threatening to move into empty spaces around the Black
Queen, and the two defending Black Beetles are now
covered!

But this seemingly dire situation is actually a good defensive
position for Black. If either the White Beetle or the White
Mosquito moves, then a Black Beetle will be released.
Because of the close proximity of the two stacks, the released
Black Beetle will be in position to cover the other bug and the
attack will be stopped. Two properly placed defending
Beetles have proven to be a strong defensive force.
Two properly placed Beetles atop the hive can stop
an opposing Two Beetle Attack. Be ready for these
chances and watch your victory totals climb.

L

LM
Figure 7.10.14
51 wB1 bB2

Q

B

L

B

51

LM

7.10.5 – Conclusion
A Beetle atop the hive is a dangerous thing. Two
Beetles atop the hive are deadly. Watch for your
chances to implement this strong weapon and double
your chances for victory!

Page 137

Chapter 7.10 – Two Beetle Attack

Page 138

Play Hive® Like a Champion

by Randy Ingersoll

Chapter 7.11 – Using Your Spiders

Chapter 7.11 – Using Your Spiders
Spiders are generally considered the least powerful of all the
bugs. Their strictly limited movement pattern is the most
difficult for beginners to master. But in the hands of a true
Hive® Master, even with its limited movement, there are
situations in which a Spider can be a very useful bug.

Initial placement is extremely important with the Spider.
When an Ant or a Beetle is not placed in its optimal space a
player may only lose one or more tempo to get it into the
proper position. When placing a Spider, however, it is vitally
important that its intended target is taken into consideration.
A misplaced Spider may never be able to reach an important
space.

7.11.1 – Spiders in the Opening

Many Hive® players find Spiders more useful in the opening
than later in the game. Due to its three space movement limit,
a Spider can more quickly move from one end of the hive to
the other in the opening when the hive has yet to grow to its
full size.
In the game U!HV-Eucalyx-ringersoll-2010-08-30-2234, we
have an excellent example of White getting a very efficient
use of both Spiders. First, in Figure 7.11.1, Spider #1 is
placed in such a way that it threatens to pin the Black Queen,
either directly or indirectly. If Black places a new bug in
either space A or space B, then White Spider #1 will pin the
new bug, indirectly pinning the Black Queen. If Black places
a new bug in any other space, then White Spider #1 will pin
the Queen from space B. Moving the Queen is no better.
Not only does this waste a valuable tempo, it does not get her
out of danger. If she moves to space E, the White Spider will
pin her from space D. If she moves to space C, she is moving
into danger and will soon be pinned as White continues to
develop more bugs.
A few moves later, White follows the excellent placement of
Spider #1 with the placement of Spider #2 as seen in
Figure 7.11.2. This newly placed Spider is well positioned to
choose between two excellent uses. It can move to space A
and pin Black Ant #1 or move to space B and attack the Black
Queen. There are only two ways to stop White Spider #2 from
attacking the Black Queen in space B. The first way is to

Figure 7.11.1
5 wS1 wQ/

5

A

B

C

D
E

S
Figure 7.11.2
11 wS2 wS1/

A
11

B

C

S

Page 139

Chapter 7.11 – Using Your Spiders

Play Hive® Like a Champion

place a pin with Black Ant #1. This, however, releases White
Beetle #1 and is therefore not a viable option for Black.
The second is to place a defensive bug (Hopper or Beetle) in
space B. This is a better option but still not a great one. If a
new bug is placed in space B, it can immediately be pinned
by the White Spider moving to space C.
Excellent use of the Spiders in the opening will lead to
another win by White.

The same theme appears in the next two figures from the
game U!HV-ringersoll-HoborgHUN-2011-01-15-2116. Turn
five is shown in Figure 7.11.3 when White places the first
Spider. Black’s Ant placement on turn six then allows the
White Spider to place the pin on turn seven.

Figure 7.11.3
5 wS1 wQ\
6 bA1 bG1\
7 wS1 bA1\

6

7

A

5

Figure 7.11.4 shows a few moves later as White places
Spider #2, Black chooses to attack with Hopper #2, and then
White pins the Black Queen with the newly placed Spider.
By turn 13, White has both Spiders in the game and they are
both performing very important tasks! One is pinning an
opposing Ant and the other has pinned the enemy Queen!

A word of warning is needed before proceeding. In Chapter 8
– Beginners’ Mistakes, under the subheading ‘Misusing Your
Ants,’ one of the topics will be ‘Failing to Get Your Ants into
Play Quickly Enough.’ When a beginner learns the power of
a Spider properly placed during the opening, it is natural to
want to place both Spiders early. This can, however, be
a mistake if one’s Ants are not developed quickly and
efficiently.
Using your Spiders wisely in the opening will pay off
with victories in the end!

Page 140

S
Figure 7.11.4
11 wS2 wQ/
12 bG2 -wQ
13 wS2 bQ/

11
13

A

12

S

by Randy Ingersoll

7.11.2 – Pin Replacement

One of the more common uses for a Spider is as a pin
replacement, typically freeing an Ant for use elsewhere in the
hive. Though more common in the later stages of the game,
this tactic can be used at any time from the opening, through
the midgame, to late in the endgame. Here is a classic
example of the use of a Spider as a pin replacement relatively
early in a game. This comes from the 2011 BoardSpace
Tournament final round game T!HV-ringersoll-DrRaven2011-07-07-0031.

Chapter 7.11 – Using Your Spiders

Figure 7.11.5
14 bS1 bA1\

14

A

In Figure 7.11.5 we see Black’s placement of Spider #1
on turn 14. Note how this placement allows a later move to
space A, pinning White Beetle #1 and freeing Black Ant #1
for more productive use. If you look ahead to Figure 7.11.10
(page 143), you will see how Black Ant #1 was, in fact, used
after the completion of the pin replacement.

Another pin replacement is illustrated in Figure 7.11.6, from
the game U!HV-Eucalyx-ringersoll-2010-08-30-2234, seen
both previously in this section regarding Spider use in the
opening and in Section 6.1.2 – Replacing a Pin. Here Black
Spider #2 is placed so that by moving to space A, the pin on
the two White bugs is replaced and Black Ant #3 can now
safely be used elsewhere.
Although not the classic maneuver seen in Figure 7.11.5, this
pin replacement was effective none the less.

L
Figure 7.11.6
26 bS2 bA2-

Q

26

When tempo is not an issue and a Spider is in
reserve, watch for possible pin replacements. Trade
in a Spider and receive an Ant! This is a great,
winning technique that even a beginner can master.
A

S

Page 141

Chapter 7.11 – Using Your Spiders

7.11.3 – Spider Placement

The game U!HV-FishBoy-ringersoll-2010-12-16-0027 is
very instructive, contrasting good Spider placement with poor
Spider placement. On turn 12 (Figure 7.11.7), Black’s first
Spider placement brings with it a dual threat. The first threat
is a direct pinning attack on the White Queen (space A). The
second is a double pin on two White Ants (space B). White, a
beginner, concentrating on defending his Queen, moved the
Queen out of range of the newly placed Spider. Unfortunately,
this allowed Black to pin two very valuable Ants with just one
Spider, a trade that definitely favored Black!
Black’s good Spider placement is immediately followed by a
poor Spider placement by White (Turn 15 in Figure 7.11.8).
When White’s Spider attacks the Black Queen by moving to
space A, a bad ring is formed (Chapter 8.3 – Beginners’
Mistakes – Making a Ring). The Black Queen escapes and
pins the White Spider in the process.

Play Hive® Like a Champion

Figure 7.11.7
12 bS1 bL1\
13 wQ -wA2

13

A
B

12

Figure 7.11.8
15 wS1 wA1/
16 bA2 bL1\
17 wS1 bA118 bQ wS1-

LM

17

A

15

18

16

Now contrast what actually happened to what could have
occurred. Please look at Figure 7.11.9, in which White
Spider #1 is placed just one space farther away from the
Black Queen. Now, if the White Spider is allowed to approach
the Black Queen, it successfully pins the Queen from space A.
From this position, the Black Queen can not escape. (We have
seen this game previously in Chapter 7.3 – Controlling Bug
Placement.)

LM
Figure 7.11.9
Alt 15 wS1 wA1-

A
15

All in all, this is a very instructive game highlighting the
importance of well thought out Spider placement.
The Spider is the weakest of all bugs in the hive. Well
planned placement is critical if a Hive® player wishes
to become a master of both the Spider and the game.

Page 142

LM

by Randy Ingersoll

7.11.4 – Spiders on the Attack

Continuing with the game T!HV-ringersollDrRaven-2011-07-07-0031, from Section 7.11.2,
we can see White put both Spiders to excellent use.

Chapter 7.11 – Using Your Spiders

Figure 7.11.10
21 wS1 wA2\
22 bA1 wS1-

Figure 7.11.10 shows the placement of the first
White Spider. Notice how it threatens to pin Black
Beetle #1 by moving to space A. And if the Beetle
moves, the White Spider attacks the Black Queen
by swooping into the vacated space. This virtually
forces Black to respond by using Ant #1 to place a
pin from Space B. This Ant will remain tied down
to defense until the threat by the White Spider is
removed. But, before finding out the ultimate use
of White Spider #1, let’s turn our attention to White
Spider #2.
The second White Spider is brought into play
on turn 33 (Figure 7.11.11). The first and foremost
threat is an offensive one. White Spider #2
threatens to move into space A. Not only does the
Spider attack the Black Queen from this space, it
also frees White Beetle #1 to climb atop the hive.
This second Spider is also well placed defensively.
It can move to space B, possibly freeing the White
Queen to escape, or it can be used to pin Black
Spider #2 if it should attack the White Queen.

When, in fact, Black chooses to attack, White
elects to continue the attack rather than defend. The
resulting position as Black continues to attack is
shown in Figure 7.11.12.

A

L

21

22

B

L
Figure 7.11.11
33 wS2 wQ/
A

33

Q

B

L

L
Figure 7.11.12
36 bS1 bG1/

36

Q

B

L

L

Page 143

Chapter 7.11 – Using Your Spiders
The final diagram from this game (Figure 7.11.13)
shows White Spider #1 coming back into play.
On turn 39, White has just moved Ant #3 into
attacking position next to the Black Queen. Now
the threat is to win the game with Ant #1
occupying space A and Beetle #2 filling space B,
the final two spots around the Queen. Black is
forced to block with Black Ant #1 as shown (turn
40). The White Spider now moves in (turn 41) to
place a pin. All three of Black’s Ants are now
rendered useless. Black cannot stop the White
attack as both White Beetles climb atop the hive
and move in for the final attack.
All in all, another game gives an instructive
midgame and endgame use of two Spiders on the
attack.

Typically speaking, the Spider is the least valuable
bug to have in the reserve as the game enters
the endgame. The inherent problems with the
Spider’s movement make finding a profitable space
to enter into the game more and more difficult. The
game HV-EddyMarlo-peter20-2011-05-23-0455,
an early round game from the 2011 BoardSpace
Tournament, shows how Spiders can be part of
a game-winning endgame attack when used in
conjunction with a Beetle cover (Chapter 6.2).
Black skillfully maneuvers so that first Spider #1
and then Spider #2 are dropped directly into
attacking position against the White Queen.
Follow along in Figure 7.11.14 as the game
progresses. Black Beetle #1 moves in to attack the
White Queen. (You may remember this game from
Chapter 7.6 – Making a Ring.)

In Figure 7.11.15 White pins Hopper #3 but cannot
stop the Black Beetle from covering the Queen on
turn 36. Notice how both space A and space B are
now opened up to direct drops from the Black
reserve!

Play Hive® Like a Champion
Figure 7.11.13
39 wA3 bB140 bA1 wA3\
41 wS1 bA1\

B

39

Q

A

L

40
41

L
Figure 7.11.14
34 bB1 bG2/

34

LM
Figure 7.11.15
35 wA1 /bG3
36 bB1 wQ

B

Q

36 A

35

LM

Page 144

by Randy Ingersoll

Chapter 7.11 – Using Your Spiders

And in Figure 7.11.16, we see that after White climbs
Beetle #1 atop Black Ant #1, Black drops Spider #1 directly
into space A. To protect against another direct drop into
space B, White is forced to slide Ant #2 as shown.

Figure 7.11.16
37 wB1 bA1
38 bS1 bG2/
39 wA2 \bB2

B

37

Q

39

A

38

Since the direct drop into space B is no longer legal, Black
finds an ingenious alternative. In Figure 7.11.17 Black frees
space C for the direct drop by jumping Black Hopper #1 as
shown. There is no defense for White, and peter20 has a well
earned victory against EddyMarlo, the two time defending
BoardSpace champion. Both Black Spiders attacked the
White Queen and yet neither of them ever moved! Direct drop
attacks proved to be devastating.
Contrary to what beginners think, Spiders CAN be
effective attackers; when used in the hands of an
experienced Hive® player, of course.

LM
Figure 7.11.17
40 bG1 bB1/

B

Q

C 40

A

LM

Page 145

Chapter 7.11 – Using Your Spiders

7.11.5 – Spiders on Defense

Beginners have an even harder time finding a good defensive
use for Spiders! But it can be done as we shall shortly prove.
In another tournament game between two masters, T!HVLoizz-ringersoll-2011-06-13-2246, Loizz makes an excellent
and instructional defensive Spider placement. Please see
Figure 7.11.18.

Black has just placed Hopper #2, planning to hop into the
elbow (space A) and free Black Ant #1. White, however, stops
this with the defensive move shown. With this excellent
Spider placement, Black cannot effectively free the Ant.
White threatens to pin the Hopper by moving into space B.
If Black continues with the original plan and hops into the
elbow, then the White Spider moves in and keeps the Black
Ant pinned.

By forcing Black to change his defense, White gained a
valuable tempo and was able to successfully continue the
attack. Ultimately, White was able to win. This move also
demonstrates how, even when on the attack, a well executed
defensive move can prove to be valuable.
Another example of a great defensive Spider placement is in
Figure 7.11.19, from the game HV-ringersoll-Fumanchu2011-02-22-1227. White has just placed Hopper #2 in
preparation for a pin replacement freeing Ant #3. Black
responds with the placement of Spider #2 as shown. This
placement forms a defensive elbow and stops the upcoming
pin replacement. If White Hopper #2 jumps into space A and
forms the elbow, Black Ant #3 is free. White quickly ran out
of bugs and with three bugs in reserve and two Ants mobile,
Black had no problem winning the game.
Defending with a Spider may not be easy, but as
these examples show it can be done!

Page 146

Play Hive® Like a Champion

Figure 7.11.18
18 bG2 -bA1
19 wS2 -wQ
B
A

18

19

L
Figure 7.11.19
21 wG2 wA322 bS2 -bA3
22

A
21

S

by Randy Ingersoll

7.11.6 – Spider Interception

Due to its inherently limited movement ability, the Spider
may not always be able to reach its destination space. This
gives way to a defensive maneuver that shall be called the
Spider Interception. This tactic is demonstrated in the game
T!HV-stepanzo-ringersoll-2013-06-14-1515 as depicted in
Figure 7.11.20 and Figure 7.11.21.
As we can see from the first figure, White has an excellent
attack going and with the placement of Spider #2 is now
directly attacking space A. Black could of course shift the pin
from White Spider #1 to White Spider #2 and pin both
spiders, but this would leave space B open to a new bug
placement. A Beetle placed here could not be stopped from
climbing atop the hive. So ringersoll decides to defend in a
different manner. He decides to use the Spider Interception.

On turn 18, as shown in the second figure, Black places
Spider #2. This move executes the intercept. From this
position the Black Spider keeps the White Spider from
attcking the Black Queen and at the same time threatens to
pin it!

Chapter 7.11 – Using Your Spiders

Figure 7.11.20
17 wS2 wS1\

B

A

17

P

Figure 7.11.21
18 bS2 bG1\

The White Spider may, and in fact will, later in the game,
move to space C and then on to space D. But in the mean time
Black will have time to place a Beetle defender in space A of
the first figure.

At this time it is important to identify a potential danger with
the placement of Black Spider #2. Note that the placement of
this bug pins a defender, Black Hopper #1. As long as this bug
stays pinned, it is not an effective defender because it loses its
ability to vacate the space adjacent to the Black Queen. The
advantage from the Spider Interception must be weighed
against the disadvantage of the self pin.

D

18

C

P

This shows just another way that the weakest bug in
the hive can be used as a powerful defender!

7.11.7 – Conclusion
Some may consider a Spider to be nearly useless, but
as you learn and study this wonderful game, you too,
will begin to see the potential in this unique bug.

Page 147

Chapter 7.11 – Using Your Spiders

Page 148

Play Hive® Like a Champion

by Randy Ingersoll

Chapter 7.12 – Counting Tempo

Chapter 7.12 – Counting Tempo
The second key to victory is Tempo (Chapter 5 – Strategy in
the Hive). If the game becomes a race, do I win before my
opponent does? If we both go all out on the attack, will mine
succeed before my opponent’s? If so, are there productive
ways that my opponent can delay my attack while at the same
time keeping his under way and thereby gain tempo? Can I
guard against this?
If your opponent is a tempo ahead and would win an outright
race, ask yourself, “What can I do to slow him down and shift
the advantage to me?”

7.12.1 – Simple Tempo Counting

Let’s start with the simple counting tempo example (U!HVguest-ringersoll-2011-01-28-2345) from Chapter 7.1 –
Counting Bugs. Figure 7.12.1 is the same as Figure 7.1.12
with labels added to the six vacant spaces adjacent to the two
Queens. As noted previously, Black can win easily by
bringing the final three Black bugs (a Hopper and two
Beetles) into play and moving them into position.
This would take six moves. Black counted tempo and realized
that even with White on the move, the game could be won in
only three without risk of losing.

The key to winning in three moves is proper timing with the
three Black Ants. In the actual game White moved Beetle #2
into space F. But best is to move Beetle #2 into space D.
Here is the sequence considered by Black:

Alt 37 wB2 wB1\ (space D) Alt 38bA1 bG1\ (space A)
Black starts with Ant #1 because freeing White Ant #1 does
not pose a danger. This Ant can now move but is already
attacking the Queen. Any move it makes will just waste a
tempo (the key to Black’s entire plan).

Let’s continue with Figure 7.12.2. White slides Ant #1 into
space E. This is better than space F because if White fills
space F, then Black Ant #2 can safely release the pin on White
Hopper #3 since the White Hopper is no longer threatening to
attack the Black Queen. Then on turn 40 Black attacks with
Ant #3.

Figure 7.12.1
Alt 37 wB2 wB1\
Alt 38 bA1 bG1\
C
F
A

B

Q

37

E

D
38

S
Figure 7.12.2
Alt 39 wA1 wG2\
Alt 40 bA3 wQ\
C
F
B

E
39

40

S

Page 149

Chapter 7.12 – Counting Tempo
Here White could, with two Ants free, go on the defensive,
first pinning Black Ant #2 and then using the second Ant to
pin whatever new bug Black placed. This would only put off
the inevitable, so White pressed forward.

Play Hive® Like a Champion
Figure 7.12.3
Alt 41 wA2 bQ\
Alt 42 bA2 bS2-

Figure 7.12.3 shows the final two moves. All in all, an
elegant victory more quickly brought about by accurately
counting tempo.

42

C
F

Learn to count tempo correctly and you will also
soon be counting, not only tempo, but victories!

7.12.2 – Gaining Tempo with a Beetle
Cover

An excellent tactic to use to gain tempo is a Beetle cover
(Chapter 6.2). When the opposing Queen is covered, the
possibility exists of placing new bugs from the reserve
directly into attacking position. Each bug placed directly into
attacking position gains one tempo for the attacker.
A good example of how this can quickly lead to victory is the
game U!HV-BlackMagic-ringersoll-2010-11-25-2138. Both
players immediately go on the attack. Black, moving second,
and already a tempo behind makes a fatal mistake early.
While White attacks on turn 11 with a Beetle, Black attacks
on turn 12 with a Spider (Figure 7.12.4). We shall soon see
the importance difference between these two bugs!

In Figure 7.12.5 (page 151), White has just covered the Black
Queen and now can place bugs directly into attacking
space A and space B. Let’s count tempo and see who is
ahead. White has four spaces to fill and only one bug in play
(Beetle #1). Two of those spaces (A and B) can be filled in
just one move each. One additional bug must be brought into
play and then moved into attacking position. And finally,
Beetle #1 will fill one of the spaces. White’s final tempo
count is five.

Page 150

D

41

S
Figure 7.12.4
11 wB1 wA1/
12 bS1 wQ/

12

11

S

by Randy Ingersoll
On the other hand, Black needs three spaces filled but has no
bugs in play to fill them. Each of the three spaces will require
two tempi; one tempo to bring in a new bug from the reserve
and one tempo to move the newly placed bug into attacking
position. Even though Black is on the move, White is ahead
and will win easily. Figure 7.12.6 shows White turn 23.
Realizing that a race to the finish is a lost cause, Black has
already gone on the defensive. But it is too late. There is no
defense. White won easily. This is an excellent demonstration
of how a Beetle cover can gain tempo and lead to victory.
Use a Beetle cover to gain tempo and you will gain
victories, too.

Chapter 7.12 – Counting Tempo
Figure 7.12.5
13 wB1 bQ

13

C

A

Q

B

S
Figure 7.12.6
23 wG2 /wA3

7.12.3 – Gaining Tempo with Good
Defenders

A more complex tempo counting example is presented in
Figure 7.12.7, from the game U!HV-weronika-ringersoll2011-01-11-2256. Both players, first White and then Black,
have moved Beetles atop the opposing Queens.

White is on the move, so let’s count tempo and see who would
win an outright race to the finish. White must fill four spaces:
A, B, C, and D. Bugs in play and available are only three;
White Ant #1, White Hopper #2, and White Beetle #1.
In order to win, White must bring at least one additional bug
into play. Fortunately, a new bug can be brought into space B
and immediately be in position adjacent to the Black Queen.
So the initial count for White is 4: 1) bring in a new bug to
space B; 2) Hopper #2 to space D; 3) Ant #1 to space A; 4)
Beetle #1 to space C.
Black must fill three spaces: E, F, and G; and has three,
or possibly four, bugs already in play. These Black bugs are
Ant #2, Spider #1, Beetle #1, and possibly, Ant #1. Like
White, Black can place a new bug from the reserve directly
into position in space G. The initial count for Black is three:
1) bring a new bug to space G; 2) Ant #2 to space E;
3) Beetle #1 to space F.
Based on our initial count, Black seems to be ahead even
though White is on the move.

Q

23

S
Figure 7.12.7
21 wB1 bQ
22 bB1 wQ

G 22
E

Q

F
D
C

Q

A

21 B

S

Page 151

Chapter 7.12 – Counting Tempo
Let’s examine Figure 7.12.8, follow the next four moves, and
see how the game progresses.

On turn 23, White fills space B with Ant #3 from the reserve.
Black follows on turn 24 by also bringing in a bug (Black
Beetle #2) from the reserve to space G. And then White plays
the tempo gaining move 25 wG2 bG1-. Notice how this
moves does double duty, both attacking and defending.
It attacks space D, but it also defensively frees another space
next to the White Queen. And finally, Black slides Ant #2 into
space E.

Now counting tempo, the tempo-gaining Hopper move (turn
25) has changed things. White seems to be ahead. Both
players have two spaces to fill and both players have bugs
already in play that can fill them. For White, Ant #1 can move
into space A and Beetle #1 can move down into space C. For
Black, Spider #1 can move into space H (the space recently
vacated by White Hopper #2) and Beetle #1 can move into
space F. So the conclusion would be that White, being on the
move, would seem to have the advantage.

Play Hive® Like a Champion
Figure 7.12.8
23 wA3 wB1\
24 bB2 bS225 wG2 bG126 bA2 -bB1
24

26

Q

H 25
C

Page 152

Q

A

23

S
Figure 7.12.9
Alt 27 wA1 bS1Alt 28 bG1 bA2\

BUT the excellent defensive position of Black Hopper #1 in
combination with the positioning of Black Spider #1 creates a
winning defensive position for Black. And this is why: the
location of Black Spider #1 potentially creates a defensive
ring (Section 7.6.2 – Making a Ring – On Defense, Freeing a
Defender). As soon as either space A or space C is occupied,
a ring is formed and Black Hopper #1 is free to escape. This
escape attacks space H, gains a tempo for Black, and shifts
the victory back to Black.
Note the potential continuation as shown in Figure 7.12.9.
On turn 27 White moves Ant #1 into space A, attacking
the Queen but forming the above mentioned ring. Black
Hopper #1 hops into space H and Black is threatening to win.
Yes, White Hopper #1 can jump out, but no tempo is gained.
A new Black bug can now be brought from the reserve into
Space F, followed by Beetle #1 into the space vacated by the
White Hopper.

F

Q

F
28 I

C

Q

27

S

by Randy Ingersoll
Recognizing the problem encountered by forming the ring,
White tried a different approach. Going back to Figure 7.12.8
(page 152), White placed Hopper #3 from the reserve as
shown in Figure 7.12.10. Unfortunately, this also loses a
tempo and Black wins. First, Spider #1 attacks into space H
and then Black Beetle #1 climbs into space F.

Chapter 7.12 – Counting Tempo
Figure 7.12.10
27 wG3 wA228 bS1 bA2\

This game provides excellent examples of both accurately
counting tempo and gaining tempo by good defensive
positioning.
Count on your defense to gain tempo. Count your
tempo to gain wins!

7.12.4 – Gaining Tempo with a Waiting
Move

Interestingly enough, you can sometimes gain a tempo by
wasting a tempo, using a technique called a waiting move.
Black does this on the way to victory in Figure 7.12.11, from
the game T!HV-dynamical-Eucalyx-2013-05-15-0418.

Q

Use a waiting move to waste a tempo but gain a
tempo, and you won’t be waiting long for another
victory.

27

H
C

28

Q

A

S
Figure 7.12.11
102 bA3 /wA3
103 wS2 bP1/

White has only one space to fill while Black has two spaces
to fill. So at first glance it may seem that White is ahead. The
difference, however, is that Black has a huge lead in mobility!
Black has two bugs available (Ant #3 and Beetle #2) to fill the
final two spaces and claim victory. But White, with only
Spider #2 mobile, is suffering through a partial shutout.
Not wanting to take a chance in a long tournament game,
Eucalyx uses a waiting move. On turn 102 he moves Black
Ant #3 as shown. White must move Spider #2, vacating a
space around the Black Queen. This sequence of moves gains
a tempo for Black, who can now safely attack with Ant #3.

F

103

Q

B

Q
102

P

Page 153

Chapter 7.12 – Counting Tempo

Play Hive® Like a Champion

7.12.5 – Wasting Tempo

As has been mentioned before; many games are won or lost
by just one tempo. This means that wasting just one tempo
can lose a game. We will examine a game in which Black has
a won game in spite of the fact that White has successfully
executed a Beetle cover of the Black Queen. But then Black
throws the game away with the loss of just one tempo.
Follow along with HV-walkie-Dulok44-2011-05-11-2256,
starting with Figure 7.12.12. White has just performed a
Beetle cover of the Black Queen, a very strong offensive
maneuver, but in this case not enough to force a victory. Let’s
count tempo. Let’s count Black first since he is on the move.
Black has three spaces filled with three to go. Two Black Ants
are in play and in position to move in, so Black needs to bring
in one more bug. Black’s count is four: one to bring in an
additional bug plus three to move in the three bugs.
Now let’s count tempo for White. The Queen cover helps.
Two bugs can be dropped in directly adjacent to the Black
Queen into spaces D and E. No other bugs are in play, but
when Black moves Ant #1, White Ant #1 will be free to move.
White’s count is also four: two new bugs brought in adjacent
to the White Queen, Ant #1 filling one space, and White
Beetle #1 filling the final space.

One note regarding Black’s plan of attack: Space A must be
the final space filled because when space A is filled, White
Beetle #1, which is in a well placed defensive position, will
be free to move. The best plan would be to place a Hopper in
space B. From space B, this newly placed Hopper would
threaten both space A and space C. With the counts equal and
Black having the move, Black is ahead and should win. BUT
Black makes a serious mistake! On turn 20, Black moves
Hopper #1, a bug which is already in attacking position
(Figure 7.12.13). This loss of just one tempo costs Black the
game.
Throwing away a tempo in many cases is the
equivalence of throwing away a game. Don’t do it!

7.12.6 – Conclusion
Accurately counting tempo is an excellent way to
make your games count. Do it and win!
Page 154

Figure 7.12.12
19 wB2 bQ
C
19

B

A

D
Q

E

LM
Figure 7.12.13
20 bG1 \wB1

20

A
Q

LM

by Randy Ingersoll

Chapter 7.13 ! The Mosquito Conversion

Chapter 7.13 ! The Mosquito Conversion
The Mosquito has the potential to be the most powerful bug
in play. In the hands of an experienced Hive® player, the
Mosquito can scurry around the hive like an Ant, jump into
protected spaces like a Hopper, or climb atop the hive like a
Beetle. If one is not careful, however, the Mosquito can be
limited to moving like a Queen or a Spider, or worse yet,
rendered totally immobile by being left adjacent only to
another Mosquito.
Add a Ladybug to the mix and the Mosquito becomes even
more powerful. But all of this power is not automatic. This
unique bug must be adjacent to another piece to absorb that
piece"s movement ability.
But what does one do when one finds the Mosquito reduced
to movement of a mere Spider, for example? Use this tactic
known as the Mosquito Conversion and convert your
Mosquito into a more powerful or tactically superior bug.

7.13.1 ! Ant-Beetle Conversion
The most common Mosquito conversion, one which can
happen in the opening, midgame, or endgame, is the AntBeetle conversion. Typically in this case, the Mosquito is
initially placed adjacent to an Ant, moves adjacent to a Beetle,
and then climbs atop the hive.
Figure 7.13.1 from the game U!HV-ringersoll-DrRaven2011-04-17-0130, shows a good example of this very basic
conversion. With turn 23, White places the Mosquito into the
position as shown. Black follows by placing Beetle #1, no
doubt hoping to get the Beetle into a defensive position. But
White forces the Mosquito atop the hive by moving to
space A. Note that because of the pocket formation (Section
4.5 ! Pocket) around space A, there is no way for Black to
place a pin and stop the newly converted Mosquito from
climbing atop the hive. With a Mosquito and a Beetle now
atop the hive, White proceeded to force a win.
A Mosquito moving like a Beetle atop the hive is a
very powerful bug. Keep your eyes open for the AntBeetle conversion and you will see more victories.

Figure 7.13.1
23 wM1 wA1/
24 bB1 /bA2
25 wM1 bS1\

23

25

A

Q

24

LM

Page 155

Chapter 7.13 ! The Mosquito Conversion

Play Hive® Like a Champion

7.13.2 ! Conversion in the Opening
Another basic application of the Mosquito conversion is
highlighted in a very common Black defense in games
with both Ladybug and Mosquito. Please take a look at
Figure 7.13.2. In this opening, Black starts with Ladybug,
Mosquito, and Queen positioned as seen here. When
White attacks the Black Queen, the Mosquito, absorbing
the movement of the Ladybug, moves to space A. From this
position she pins the attacking White Ant, converts to an Ant
by acquiring the Ant"s movement ability, and frees up her
original spot for another Black defender.

Figure 7.13.2
8 bM1 \wA1

A
8

LM

As a side note, this move also restricts White"s ability to use
the White Ant to place a Beetle in close proximity to the
Black Queen.
Although a very common opening sequence, this specific
illustration comes from the game U!HV-Fumanchu-ringersoll2010-12-16-1606.
To get full use of the Mosquito, it is very important
to understand the Mosquito Conversion and use it
efficiently in the opening moves of a game of Hive®.

7.13.3 ! Proper Mosquito Placement
Application of the Mosquito conversion begins with its very
first placement. Care must be taken to ensure that the
Mosquito is placed in such a way to maximize its potential
from the very moment it enters the game.
HV-kanoeboy-chornyi-2011-05-12-1002, from the 2011
BoardSpace Tournament, is an excellent example of a
Mosquito conversion. Let"s start with Figure 7.13.3. Black
has just made what may seem to be a less than optimum
Mosquito placement. It comes into the game but with the
restricted movement of a Spider$
Examining carefully the situation shows that this seemingly
weak placement is actually a game winner. The immediate
threat is to move to space A. By doing so, the Black Mosquito
releases Hopper #2 and converts to a Ladybug. After this
move/conversion, Black has two game-winning threats.
White can counter one or the other, but not both. And thus,
Black wins.

Page 156

Figure 7.13.3
26 bM1 /bS2
B

A
26

B

LM

by Randy Ingersoll

Chapter 7.13 ! The Mosquito Conversion

White must counter both threats, but how? Because White
Ant #1 is tied down and must hold its pin on Black
Hopper #1, the only counter to this Mosquito conversion
threat is to place a new bug directly into a blocking position
(Chapter 6.3 ! The Block) in space B. Unfortunately, this
leads to a self pin of White Ant #2$ This forced move leads to
White"s loss.
A few moves later we come to the situation shown in
Figure 7.13.4. Here Black has just brought Ant #2 into the
game. By placing this new Ant adjacent to the Black
Mosquito, the Black Mosquito is given the movement of this
newly placed Ant. This is another interesting and different
application of this tactic.
The final Mosquito conversion wins the game for Black. The
Black Mosquito moves adjacent to the Black Queen as shown
in Figure 7.13.5. This poses two threats. First the Black
Queen is no longer pinned (Chapter 6.4 ! The Fill) and can
move into space A, the final space adjacent to the White
Queen. And secondly, the Black Mosquito has now converted
to a Ladybug and can easily fly into this same game-winning
space.

Figure 7.13.4
34 bA2 \bM1

B

34

LM
Figure 7.13.5
38 bM1 bQ\

B

A

All in all, this proves to be a well played game demonstrating
multiple aspects of the Mosquito conversion.
Proper Mosquito placement leads to good Mosquito
Conversions. Good Mosquito Conversions lead to
good Mosquito usage. Good Mosquito usage leads to
more victories!

38

LM

7.13.4 ! Hopper Conversion
As the game progresses and the areas around the opposing
Queens begin to be more congested, Spiders and Ants lose
their value. Unable to get into blocked or surrounded spaces,
these bugs cannot force the final victory. At these times,
Hoppers, Beetles, and Ladybugs truly show their worth.
Mosquitoes, too, can convert to these bugs and get into these
otherwise inaccessible spaces. This is another instance when
the Mosquito"s power comes to the fore.
The next game (HV-Fumanchu-ringersoll-2010-11-13-1314)
shows an Ant-Hopper conversion that leads to a win for
White.

Page 157

Chapter 7.13 ! The Mosquito Conversion
Figure 7.13.6 shows the White Mosquito moving to space A.
Adjacent to Black Hopper #1, the White Mosquito threatens
to hop into space B and end the game. Black is able to pin the
Mosquito with Ant #1 but with the White Ladybug still in
reserve, White had an easy victory in just two more moves.

Play Hive® Like a Champion
Figure 7.13.6
33 wM1 bG1\

B

B

Watch for opportunities for a Mosquito to convert
to a Hopper and at the same time watch your losses
convert to wins.

A
33

7.13.5 ! The Immobile Mosquito
Before leaving the topic of the Mosquito Conversion, a
warning is in order. Please remember that a Mosquito has no
inherent movement of its own. If a Mosquito is adjacent to no
other bugs other than another Mosquito, it has no movement
ability whatsoever.

LM
Figure 7.13.7
28 bM1 wM1/
29 wA3 bM1/

29

B

The following game (U!HV-ringersoll-DrRaven-2011-02-160208) demonstrates a scenario where the Black Mosquito
ends up losing its ability to move and spends the remainder of
the game helplessly stranded and unavailable for either attack
or defense.

A

Figure 7.13.7 shows the position when the Black Mosquito,
using the Hopper"s movement ability, jumps out, occupying
space A. At first glance this may seem to be a good move,
because the Mosquito is now adjacent to White Beetle #1 and
thus threatening to climb atop the hive. But White counters by
moving Ant #3 to space B. This pins the Black Mosquito.
Over the next few moves, White first moves Beetle #1 and
then Ant #3. With both of these bugs gone, the Black
Mosquito is only adjacent to the White Mosquito. The next
figure (Figure 7.13.8) shows this position after the Black
Mosquito has lost all its movement ability. The Black
Mosquito never moved again and White went on to win.

28

LM
Figure 7.13.8
37 wA3 /bG3

An immobile Mosquito can be a useless bug or a
serious liability. Protect against allowing your
Mosquito to become immobile.
Q

A

37

LM

Page 158

by Randy Ingersoll

Chapter 7.13 ! The Mosquito Conversion

7.13.6 ! "Faux# Beetle Conversion
Many a Hive® player has seen a seemingly well planned
attack falter because of the %Faux" Beetle conversion. One
must remember that a Mosquito gains its movement ability
from adjacent bugs. And just as was discussed in the previous
section, a Mosquito gains no movement ability from an
adjacent Mosquito, even if the adjacent Mosquito is atop the
hive and moving like a Beetle$

Figure 7.13.9
19 wM1 /bQ
20 bS1 bL1/
20

A

Figure 7.13.9, from the game T!HV-Fumanchu-ringersoll2011-07-02-1918, demonstrates this. One of the strengths of
the Ladybug/Mosquito defense for Black is that not only can
the Mosquito jump out using the movement of the Ladybug,
but if an opposing Beetle approaches, the Mosquito can climb
atop it when it covers the friendly Queen.
But when the approaching bug is a fellow Mosquito moving
like a Beetle, then this defense loses some of its effectiveness.
As the White Mosquito attacked, Black freed his own
Mosquito using a fill by Spider #1 (Turn 20). But, lo and
behold, when the White Mosquito covered the Black Queen
(Turn 21 in Figure 7.13.10), the Black Mosquito was unable
to reply in kind.
White"s cover worked as planned. The Black Mosquito could
not climb up to defend and White went on to win rather
handily.
A Mosquito on guard by your Queen is a good
defense against an opposing Beetle, but if the bug
on the attack is the opposing Mosquito, beware the
"Faux# conversion. Don#t put your trust in your
Mosquito when this is the case.

19

LM
Figure 7.13.10
21 wM1 bQ

Q

21

LM

7.13.7 ! Conclusion
Study, learn, and use successful Mosquito
Conversions and your Mosquito will demonstrate its
full power and potential! In no time at all, you will
be demonstrating the skills of a true Hive® Master.

Page 159

Chapter 7.13 ! The Mosquito Conversion

Page 160

Play Hive® Like a Champion

by Randy Ingersoll

Chapter 7.14 – The Ladybug

Chapter 7.14 – The Ladybug
In October 2010 at the Essen Game Fair in Essen, Germany,
the much anticipated Ladybug was released as the newest
expansion bug to the game Hive®. This new bug with its
unique and unusual movement pattern quickly proved to be
very useful in the hands of an experienced player.
Let’s examine some ways that a Hive® Master successfully
uses the Ladybug.

7.14.1 – The Ladybug Attacks

The most obvious use of this new bug is on the attack. With
the ability to jump into otherwise restricted spaces, the
Ladybug is much like the Hopper. When comparing the
Ladybug with the Hopper, it can be seen that each has its
strengths and weaknesses. Not being confined to straight line
movement, the Ladybug is much more flexible in initial
placement and movement. But with its strict three space
movement requirement, she does not have the long distance
attack capability of the Hopper.
Three upcoming examples will show the power of the
Ladybug on the attack.

The first excellent example of the flexibility of the Ladybug
on the attack is shown in Figure 7.14.1, from the game HVDragonfly-ringersoll-2010-10-21-0036. Even though Black
has worked hard at restricting White’s new bug placement
(Chapter 7.3 – Controlling Bug Placement), the White
Ladybug enters the game and cannot be stopped!
Note how a White Hopper cannot be brought into the game
and immediately threaten space B. Indirectly, however, a
White Hopper brought in instead of the Ladybug can threaten
this space with a hop around (Chapter 7.9). But it must first
jump to space A before going to space B and winning. With
an Ant mobile and ready to defend, Black would wait until the
Hopper is in space A and then place a pin. The Ladybug, on
the other hand, can immediately go into space B. No pin can
be placed because attempting to pin the White Ladybug
makes a ring and the Ladybug is still free to attack.

Figure 7.14.1
35 wL1 /wG2

35

A

B

LM

Page 161

Chapter 7.14 – The Ladybug
The next game, T!HV-Salish99-Fumanchu-2011-05-11-1845,
is from the 2011 BoardSpace Tournament. And again, the
flexibility of the Ladybug on the attack wins for White.
Figure 7.14.2 shows the entry of the White Ladybug on
turn 29. She comes into the game directly into a pocket
(Section 4.5) and cannot be stopped. White wins! Again note
that a Hopper placed in this same space does not immediately
threaten space A.

One final example, as shown in Figure 7.14.3, should drive
the point home. In HV-BlackMagic-ringersoll-2010-11-201541, we see a winning Ladybug attack in a situation where a
Hopper would not have been able to do the job. The Black
Ladybug will go directly to space A and win. Black has a
Hopper in reserve but no space will allow the Hopper to
directly threaten space A.

Play Hive® Like a Champion
Figure 7.14.2
29 wL1 wA2\
29

A

L
Figure 7.14.3
34 bL1 bS1-

A

Learn the Ladybug’s unique movement pattern and
you will be able to make excellent use of the Ladybug
on the attack.

34

7.14.2 – The Ladybug in Confined
Space

One of the major strengths of the Ladybug is the ability to
maneuver in confined spaces. In many situations the attacker
may find himself in a situation where the final space that
needs to be filled cannot be reached by any available bugs.
But an attacking Ladybug can jump directly from one
attacking space to another attacking space and in doing so,
she opens a space that can then be reached by another bug.
Figure 7.14.4 demonstrates this ability. This example comes
from the game HV-bird-ringersoll-2010-12-03-2326, another
loss for the author. (It seems that the best lessons learned
come from losses!)

LM
Figure 7.14.4
43 wL1 wS1-

B

43

A

LM

Page 162

by Randy Ingersoll
All the White bugs are in play. Due to a series of good pins
and blocks, Black has put up an excellent defense. Of the
White bugs not already in attacking position, three of them
are free to move: Ant #3, Hopper #1, and Spider #2. But none
of them are in position to move into space A. It seems that the
White attack has come to a grinding halt. But NO, the power
of the Ladybug in confined spaces wins the day. The White
Ladybug makes the move shown, moving into space A. Now
White has dual winning threats. White Ant #3 and Hopper #1
both threaten the space vacated by the Ladybug. Black can
stop one or the other, but not both; so White wins.

In situations such as these, an attacking Ladybug that is
otherwise free to move can move into any of the other
attacking spaces in just one turn. A Hopper, on the other hand,
can only jump into the space directly opposite its current
space and a Beetle, although able to move to any space, may
take two turns to do so.
From the 2011 BoardSpace Tournament semi-finals we find
another excellent example of a Ladybug showing her
superiority in confined spaces (T!HV-DrRaven-EddyMarlo2011-06-29-1850). White has a very strong attack. Black has
defended well and is threatening to draw. But the White
Ladybug pulls out the victory. The winning move is shown in
Figure 7.14.5 as the White Ladybug moves from its current
location directly into space A.

Replace the Ladybug with any other White bug and Black
will more than likely earn the draw. The only other bug that
could make this move would be a Beetle. But a Beetle will
take two turns, first climbing up atop the hive and then
climbing down into space A. As soon as the Beetle vacates its
current space, one of the Black Ants will move in and the
game will almost assuredly end in a draw.
Used in conjunction with a fill (Chapter 6.4), a Ladybug can
be unstoppable as demonstrated in HV-Vindicator-ringersoll2010-11-17-0003. As shown in Figure 7.14.6, Black has been
relegated to fighting for a draw and so, on turn 42, moves
Hopper #1 as shown. White responds on turn 43 with a fill
that releases the Ladybug.

Chapter 7.14 – The Ladybug

Figure 7.14.5
42 bG1 -bS1
43 wL1 wQ42

A
43

Q

B

M

LM
Figure 7.14.6
42 bG1 wL143 wA3 /bL1

43

42

LM

Page 163

Chapter 7.14 – The Ladybug
Figure 7.14.7 shows the versatility of the Ladybug on
defense as the Black Ladybug moves to pin the White Ant,
relieve the fill, and render the White Ladybug immobile.

Play Hive® Like a Champion
Figure 7.14.7
44 bL1 -wA3

44

Unfortunately for Black, White has a Hopper in reserve (any
bug will do, but the Hopper presents dual game-winning
threats). As we see in Figure 7.14.8, Black can pin the
Hopper but cannot stop the Ladybug from moving into
space A. White wins and again shows the versatility of the
Ladybug in confined spaces.
In confined space the Ladybug will prove her worth,
if you learn how to use her correctly.

LM
Figure 7.14.8
45 wG3 wA3/
46 Black resigns
45

A

LM

Page 164

by Randy Ingersoll

7.14.3 – The Ladybug on Defense

We have seen how effective the Ladybug can be in the
confined space around the opposing Queen. Now let’s see
how effective she can be on defense.

Chapter 7.14 – The Ladybug

Figure 7.14.9
27 wG1 wS1/
28 bL1 wQ\

Let’s start with Figure 7.14.9 from the game U!HV-weronikaringersoll-2010-12-11-1459. White has just attacked with
Hopper #1. The Black Queen could attempt an escape but that
could leave the Queen without any effective defense. Instead,
on turn 28, the Black Ladybug moves as shown. White must
now either place a new bug or move the Ladybug (the only
mobile White bug). In two moves the Black Queen will be
free. With only three bugs in reserve, White does not have
enough bugs to win. (See Chapter 7.1 – Counting Bugs.)
The next example, Figure 7.14.10 from the game U!HV-birdringersoll-2010-12-11-1848, shows how a defending
Ladybug can move out and replace a pin on an opposing bug.
Both Black Ant #2 and the Black Mosquito are now free and
will soon be used elsewhere in the hive.

27

28

LM
Figure 7.14.10
24 bL1 -wS2

24

A Ladybug vs. Ladybug battle occurs in the game HVringersoll-guest-2011-04-24-1840. First, in Figure 7.14.11,
we see the White Ladybug move out and effectively pin the
defending Black Hopper. Black responds on turn 26 with a
Ladybug pin as shown.

LM
Figure 7.14.11
25 wL1 bG2\
26 bL1 wL1\

25
26

LM

Page 165

Chapter 7.14 – The Ladybug
A few moves later Black threatens to win with a well placed
Hopper fill (Chapter 6.4) on turn 42, releasing the Ladybug as
seen in Figure 7.14.12. The flexibility of the Ladybug on
defense shows as the White Ladybug moves on turn 43 to set
a pin on the Black Ladybug.

Play Hive® Like a Champion
Figure 7.14.12
42 bG2 bL1/
43 wL1 bL1\

A

Q

43
42

Another Black fill, this time with Ant #3 (Figure 7.14.13),
and again the White Ladybug responds by shifting and
resetting the pin.

LM
Figure 7.14.13
44 bA3 wL1/
45 wL1 /bL1

With the close proximity of the two Queens and both players’
effective use of the Ladybug, this game ended in a draw after
66 moves.
Q

45
44

And finally we get our last example of a defending Ladybug
from the game HV-weronika-ringersoll-2010-12-08-1205.
Figure 7.14.14 shows what occurs right after the White
Mosquito jumped in and attacked the Black Queen. The threat
is that White Beetle #1 will climb atop the Black Ladybug and
from this position atop the hive it cannot be stopped!
The Black Ladybug ‘bugs out’ and while doing so, sets a
block on the White Beetle. This move frees the Black Queen
to escape.

LM

Figure 7.14.14
39 wM1 wB1/
40 bL1 wG2-

39

40

LM

Page 166

by Randy Ingersoll
In order to keep the Black Queen trapped, White’s response in
Figure 7.14.15 is forced. The Black Ladybug slides across
pinning the Hopper, setting a block on space A, and freeing
the Mosquito. With both vacant spaces around the Black
Queen protected by blocks, the White Spider in reserve is
virtually useless.

Chapter 7.14 – The Ladybug
Figure 7.14.15
41 wG1 bL1/
42 bL1 wG1\

41

The Ladybug defender has done another great job and Black
goes on to win.

A

Keeping in mind the flexibility and defensive ability
of the Ladybug will allow you to continue to count
your victories.

42

LM

7.14.4 – Ladybug in the Opening

The combination of the strengths of the Ladybug: on offense,
working in confined space, and on defense, makes the
Ladybug an excellent choice as an opening bug. The late
rounds of the 2011 BoardSpace Online Tournament*
highlight this magnificently. In fourteen of the twenty three
games played in the final two rounds of the tournament both
players started with the Ladybug. In the other nine, one of the
two players opened with her.
We will look at just one example (T!HV-ringersollFumanchu-2011-06-28-2316). In this game, Fumanchu uses
the Ladybug/Mosquito opening as Black and pulls out a draw.
Figure 7.14.16 shows the position after four moves by each
player.

The Black Ladybug is well placed in numerous ways. In this
defensive position, the Ladybug is ready to jump out if a ring
is formed or space A is filled. The close proximity to the
White Queen means that when she jumps out, she can, if she
wishes, immediately attack the White Queen. And finally, the
adjacent Mosquito has been given her movement ability and
can thus also jump out defensively.

Figure 7.14.16
7 wA1 \bQ
8 bA1 bL1\

7

A

8

LM

* Because the Ladybug had just recently been introduced, the rules of the
2011 BoardSpace Online Tournament required that the Ladybug be used in
every game.

Page 167

Chapter 7.14 – The Ladybug
All nine games of the semi-final matchup between Fumanchu
and ringersoll are listed below* because they are excellent
games demonstrating all aspects of the use of the Ladybug.
Studying them will give a Hive® student an excellent
education in the use of the Ladybug.
The Ladybug is an excellent choice for an opening
bug. Use her wisely and your play will continue to
improve.

7.14.5 – Conclusion
The Ladybug is an interesting addition to the
complement of Hive® bugs. With her intriguing
movement pattern, she provides many unique
opportunities to use her in a variety of situations.
Study and learn how to use her effectively. If used
properly, she will win many games for you.

* Here are the nine games of the 2011 Tournament semi-final
between Fumanchu and ringersoll:
T!HV-Fumanchu-ringersoll-2011-06-26-1833; won by White
T!HV-ringersoll-Fumanchu-2011-06-27-2357; won by White
T!HV-ringersoll-Fumanchu-2011-06-28-2316; draw
T!HV-Fumanchu-ringersoll-2011-06-29-2314; won by White
T!HV-ringersoll-Fumanchu-2011-07-02-1812; won by White
T!HV-Fumanchu-ringersoll-2011-07-02-1918; won by White
T!HV-ringersoll-Fumanchu-2011-07-02-2014; won by White
T!HV-Fumanchu-ringersoll-2011-07-03-1907; won by Black
T!HV-ringersoll-Fumanchu-2011-07-03-1957; won by White

Page 168

Play Hive® Like a Champion

by Randy Ingersoll

Chapter 7.15 – The Pillbug

7.15 – The Pillbug
With a history of over ten years on the market and an
established worldwide player base, the standard game of Hive®
is an exciting, thought provoking challenge to any serious
gamer, while remaining simple and easy to learn for
the younger or less intense audience. Add the two earlier
expansions, the Mosquito and the Ladybug, and the game
becomes even deeper and more exciting. Unfortunately, most
experienced Hive® players recognize that adding these bugs
increases the advantage that White has by virtue of the first
move.
In discussions among players around the world, particularly
in some of the user threads on BoardGameGeek, it is
commonly recognized that there has been a need for a
defensive bug to balance the offensive power of the Mosquito
and Ladybug. In response, John Yianni proposed in
January 2013 a new bug. By allowing play testing at
BoardSpace.net*, feedback from some of the best players in
the world resulted in an exciting new addition to the Hive®
family: the Pillbug!

7.15.1 – Rescuing the Queen

The most obvious use of the Pillbug is in a defensive role,
rescuing the friendly Queen from the immediate danger of
loss. The first two games will show good examples of how
this can occur.
The first example comes from the game U!HV-kkurtonisringersoll-2013-05-22-1657 as shown in Figure 7.15.1.
White, continuing with the attack, brings in Ant #2 on turn 21.
White has a very strong threat! There is a bug ready to fill
each of the two empty spaces adjacent to the Black Queen.
Ant #2 can occupy space A and Beetle #1 easily drops down
into space B. Even if the Black Pillbug moves out when the
ring is formed, the White Hopper currently under Beetle #1
will be in place to deliver the final blow into the space vacated
by the Pillbug.
But here comes the power of the Pillbug Queen Rescue.
On turn 22, the Black Pillbug picks up the Black Queen and
moves her as shown**. Not only does this retrieve the Queen

Figure 7.15.1
21 wA2
wS122 bP1:bQ bA1/

22

B

G

A

21

P

*Games prior to February 24, 2013, the Pillbug rules were different.
**Special movement notation is needed for the Pillbug, please see page 13.

Page 169

Chapter 7.15 – The Pillbug
from a dangerous position, it also leaves the White Pillbug
and White Ant #1 hopelessly pinned.
Another example of a classic Queen Rescue is shown in
Figure 7.15.2, from the game U!HV-fungames-ringersoll2013-05-03-2142. Both players have strong attacks brewing,
but the difference is the Black Pillbug. Black had just attacked
with Ant #2 on turn 36. This fills the 5th space and threatens
to win. White countered by jumping out with Hopper #1 on
turn 37. This is also an attacking move, filling the
penultimate space around the Black Queen. Now White is
only one space away from victory.
But Black responds as shown in Figure 7.15.3: he uses the
Pillbug on turn 38 to rescue the Queen. White’s threat has
been terminated and with White in a shutout position, two
Black Ants free, and Black Beetle #1 atop the hive, Black had
no problems, winning in just two more turns.

Play Hive® Like a Champion
Figure 7.15.2
36 bA2 /bG1
37 wG1 wP1/

37

A

36

P
Figure 7.15.3
38 bP1:bQ bP1-

In some situations you may need to help complete the
surrounding of your own Queen in order to successfully
extract her from a dangerous situation.

Notice how in the game U!HV-Juamax-ringersoll-2013-0417-2138 (Figure 7.15.4) Black uses Spider #2 to fill the fifth
space around the friendly Queen. This will allow the Pillbug,
on a future turn, to place the Queen outside the
confines of her current position. This move drastically
improves her safety and defensibility. It is no wonder then
that Black won the game easily.
Position your Pillbug adjacent to your Queen and
when your opponent attacks, execute a Queen
Rescue to move her out of danger!

38
A

P
Figure 7.15.4
22 bS2 wS1/

22

P

Page 170

by Randy Ingersoll

7.15.2 – Stripping an Attacker

To rescue the friendly Queen, the Pillbug must be
adjacent to her. Move the Pillbug one space away
and it is in place to execute the second common
defensive maneuver by stripping away attacking
bugs.
Our first example of this tactic comes from the
game U!HV-wisewol-ringersoll-2013-05-21-1808.
As depicted in Figure 7.15.5, White brings in
Beetle #2 to advance toward the Black Queen.
In defense, the Black Pillbug picks up White
Hopper #3 and moves it away from the Queen.
Not only does this remove the Hopper from attacking
the Queen, but from this position, it cannot get back
to the attacking position that it was in!
In this next game (U!HV-kkurtonis-ringersoll-201305-08-2142), both players use this tactic. First Black,
and then White, strip away attacking bugs from their
Queen.

Chapter 7.15 – The Pillbug

Figure 7.15.5
41 wB2 wA142 bP1:wG3 bP1/

42

P
Figure 7.15.6
38 bB2 bQ/

In Figure 7.15.6 Black Beetle #2 moves in as shown.
Using a fill, this move will allow the Black Pillbug to
strip away White Ant #1.

After White brings in a Beetle on turn 39 (See
Figure 7.15.7.), the Black Pillbug strips away White
Ant #1. Note that due to the rule regarding bugs just
moved by a Pillbug, the recently moved White Ant
cannot move in the immediately following turn.
By moving the White Ant into the elbow, Black
Ant #1 is also free to move. And when it does, White
Ant #1 will be pinned.
Later in the game, after halting the White attack,
Black begins the counter attack. But White uses the
same tactic to strip away a Black attacker and the
game ends in a draw.

41

A

38

G

P
Figure 7.15.7
39 wB2 wS2\
40 bP1: wA1 bP1-

40
G

39

P

Page 171

Play Hive® Like a Champion

Chapter 7.15 – The Pillbug
Figure 7.15.8
64 bB1 wQ/

Figure 7.15.9
65 wP1:bG2 -wP1

P

P

G

64

65

P

P

Black Beetle #1 moves in to attack (Figure 7.15.8) and the
White Pillbug strips away the attacking Black Hopper #2
(Figure 7.15.9).

Neither player has the strength available to force a victory and
after just a few more moves the players agreed to a draw.
By using the Attacker Strip, each player put up an effective
defense.
When choosing to use this defense, placement of the Pillbug
can be critical. Figure 7.15.10 shows the difference between
an in line Pillbug placement and an elbow Pillbug placement.
In this game (U!HV-ringersoll-image13-2013-03-03-1223)
the Black Pillbug is in line with the Black Queen. It can only
strip a bug from space A. On the other hand, the White Pillbug
has just moved into an elbow alignment with the White
Queen. It can strip bugs from two different spaces. It can strip
out Black Ant #1 or (if Black Beetle #2 moves away) Black
Ant #2 (currently under the Black Beetle).
With the close proximity of the two Queens this difference
did not matter. With two expert players, this game was
destined to be a draw.
A Pillbug does not need to be adjacent to the
friendly Queen in order to defend her: two spaces
away is close enough to use its special power to
pluck out attacking bugs.
Page 172

Figure 7.15.10
43 wP1 bB2-

A

A

43

P

by Randy Ingersoll

Chapter 7.15 – The Pillbug

7.15.3 – Covering the Pillbug

By adding the ability to rescue a threatened Queen, the
Pillbug completely changes the complexion of the game of
Hive®. With another weapon added to the defensive arsenal of
a master player, an attacker must always take the Pillbug into
consideration when planning an attack. The next five sections
discuss how to counter the Pillbug and its powerful defensive
potential.
In theory, the easiest counter to the Pillbug is a Beetle.
By covering either the Pillbug or the Queen, an attacker has
removed the defender’s ability to rescue the Queen. In many
cases this leads to a successful attack.
Our first example comes from the game U!HV-ringersollkkurtonis-2013-04-19-2304. Figure 7.15.11 shows the game
early on as Black brings in the Pillbug in a good defensive
position, adjacent to the Black Queen. White counters by
bringing in Beetle #1 in position to move in on the Black
Queen and Pillbug.

Figure 7.15.11
12 bP1 /bG1
13 wB1 /wS1

The game continues a few moves later in Figure 7.15.12.
Here we see the White Beetle covering the Black Queen and
rendering her immobile. This effectively removes the
Pillbug’s ability to rescue the Black Queen. This does,
however, give Black an advantage in tempo. While White has
placed and moved Beetle #1, Black has placed two Ants. This
gain in tempo shifts the momentum and allows Black to gain
a very strong attack.
Over the next dozen moves, Black continues attacking while
White is forced on the defensive. Ultimately this leads to
Figure 7.15.13 (page 174). On turn 33, White brings in
Beetle #2 with the plan to advance and cover Black Beetle #2.
This serves multiple purposes: first, White Ant #2 will be
freed for defense; second, the Black Beetle will continue to be
immobilized; and third, the White Beetle will be in position to
cover the Black Pillbug.

12

13

P
Figure 7.15.12
17 wB1 bQ
18 bA2 \bS1
18

With two Beetles atop the hive to completely counter the
power of the Black Pillbug, two Ants free, and a Hopper
in reserve, White carefully defended, counter attacked, and
eventually won on turn 55.

Q

17

P

Page 173

Chapter 7.15 – The Pillbug
Figure 7.15.13
32 bA3 wQ/
33 wB2 wA2\

Play Hive® Like a Champion
Figure 7.15.14
33 wG2 wG1/
34 bG1 -wB2

32

Q

34

33
33

P

In the next game (HV-blefinjo-ringersoll-2013-05-051828) while White attacks, Black defends carefully, all
the while keeping a Beetle in reserve. After having
successfully withstood the White assault, Black counter
attacks, using the carefully preserved Beetle to neutralize
the opposing Pillbug.

P
Figure 7.15.15
37 wS2 bB1\
38 bB2 /bS2

Figure 7.15.14 shows a Hopper exchange, White attacking
with Hopper #2 and Black jumping out with Hopper #1.

A quick bug count after the continuation in Figure 7.15.15,
shows that Black has successfully defended. White needs
two bugs to win. The Hopper in reserve will be able to
attack, but the only two mobile White bugs are both
Spiders and neither of them can get into a game winning
attacking position. On turn 38 Black brings in the final
Beetle to begin the assault on the White Queen.

37

38

P

Page 174

by Randy Ingersoll

Chapter 7.15 – The Pillbug

Figure 7.15.16
44 bB2 wP1

Figure 7.15.17
14 bB2 wQ/
15 wA2 bB2/

15

14
B

44

P

P

On turn 44 in Figure 7.15.16, the Black Beetle neutralizes the
White Pillbug and the Black attack will be unstoppable. With
two bugs in reserve and two Ants mobile, Black won easily.

P
Figure 7.15.18
16 bA1 bG1/
17 wP1 wG1\
16

To make effective use of your Pillbug in defending your
Queen, you must constantly consider the possibility of an
opposing Beetle covering either your Pillbug or your Queen.
In many cases a player will wait until both opposing Beetles
are neutralized before bringing in a defending Pillbug.
This is demonstrated in the following two figures from the
game U!HV-ringersoll-Juamax-2013-04-17-2221.

Figure 7.15.17 shows White pinning the second Beetle as it
moves in toward the White Queen.

And now, since both Black Beetles are pinned, White brings
in the Pillbug on turn 17 in Figure 7.15.18.

Later when Black threatened to win by filling the fifth space
around the White Queen (turn 24 in Figure 7.15.19), the
White Pillbug used its special ability to extract the Queen and
stop the Black attack. On turn 25 the White Queen is picked
up and deposited safely into space A. With the Queen now
safe, White continued the attack on the Black Queen and won
easily.
The most effective way to counter the special power of
the opposing Pillbug is to use a Beetle cover.
Plan for the power of this common tactic and you will
soon be a successful Hive® player.

17

P
Figure 7.15.19
24 bS2 wP125 wP1:wQ /wG1

Q

A

25

24

P

Page 175

Chapter 7.15 – The Pillbug

7.15.4 – Surround the Pillbug

A second method to counter the Pillbug is to surround it.
The special power of the Pillbug allows it to pick up an
endangered Queen and move her to safety. But, if the Pillbug
is completely surrounded, then its special ability is totally
useless. Even if only partially surrounded, the destination
spaces for the Queen may not be better, or sometimes
possibly even worse, then her current location.

Play Hive® Like a Champion

Figure 7.15.20
36 bS2 bG1\
37 wG3 \wA1

37

Let’s examine our first example from the game U!HVblefinjo-guest-2013-05-19-1053. Looking at Figure 7.15.20
we see both Queens under assault but we also see that each
of them has a friendly Pillbug nearby to defend. Black
Spider #2 enters the game on turn 36 and moves in for the
attack on turn 38.

B

36

Figure 7.15.21 shows the situation as the Black Spider
attacks. Black is in position to win with Ant #2 occupying the
final space to surround the White Queen. The White Pillbug
can pick up and move the White Queen to either space A or
space B. But take a look at these two possible destination
spaces! Each of them is already surrounded by five bugs.
And in each case, Black Ant #2 can easily reach the final
space and win the game. The power of the White Pillbug has
been negated and White had to find a different way to defend.
Using Ant #2, as shown on turn 39, White pinned Black
Ant #2 and at the same time set a block to protect the final
space around the White Queen.
Unfortunately this freed Black Beetle #2 which moved in to
join the attack.
The win was not easy for Black. With only one Hopper left
in reserve, a defending White Pillbug, and the danger of a
strong White attack, Black had to play very carefully.

Page 176

P

Figure 7.15.21
38 bS2 bA1/
39 wA2 /bA2

B

A
B
C

38

39

P

by Randy Ingersoll

Chapter 7.15 – The Pillbug

Figure 7.15.22
54 bP1 wP1/

Figure 7.15.23
19 wA2 wG1/
20 bA2 \wA2
19

54

B

B

20

A

P

Figure 7.15.22 shows the Black Pillbug advancing into the
fray as the White Pillbug continues to have no practical way
to rescue the endangered Queen. Black finally prevailed on
turn 64.

P
Figure 7.15.24
23 wG2 /wA1
24 bA3 /wA2
B

This proved to be an instructive game, one in which Black
won primarily because the White Pillbug was surrounded and
could not use its special power to rescue the Queen.
The next game shows how a placement error by White
negated the power of the Pillbug, allowing Black to win.
Figure 7.15.23 shows this mistake from the game U!HVkkurtonis-ringersoll-2013-03-30-2357.

White places Ant #2 on turn 19 and Black promptly pins it on
the ensuing turn 20. The problem is not that the newly placed
Ant was pinned, this is almost expected in this situation.
The problem is that the newly pinned Ant is helping surround
the White Pillbug!

The position a few turns later is shown in Figure 7.15.24 as
Black Ant #3 moves in to attack the White Queen and keep
the Pillbug surrounded.
Black Ant #1 attacked on turn 26 in Figure 7.15.25 and Black
won on the following turn.

24

23

P
Figure 7.15.25
25 wS2 wS1/
26 bA1 wG1/

B

25
26

P

Page 177

Chapter 7.15 – The Pillbug
One final example of surrounding the Pillbug comes from the
game U!HV-BadBunny-ringersoll-2013-07-09-1025. In this
case, shown in Figure 7.15.26, White has moved, first the
Pillbug and then a Hopper, into attacking position.
The Pillbug was pinned by Black Ant #2, but as we know a
single pin is not sufficient for a Pillbug, so Black needed to do
more to successfully defend. Black elected to advance his
own Pillbug on turn 24 as shown.

Play Hive® Like a Champion
Figure 7.15.26
23 wG2 wS2/
24 bP1 bB1-

This move provides multiple benefits. It stays within range of
the friendly Queen so if the opportunity arises it can rescue
her. It is now in position to strip away White Spider #1 and
finally, as we are here demonstrating, by partially surrounding
the White Pillbug, it removes the danger of a Pillbug attack.

23

QB

24

If it is not practical to cover your opponent’s Pillbug,
watch for the opportunity to surround it. Yes, you can
negate the power of the Pillbug, if you know how!

P

7.15.5 – Squeeze the Pillbug

The Squeeze is a very powerful tactic used to force your
opponent to make a move that is advantageous to your cause
and not to your opponent’s. Under normal circumstances, the
special power of the Pillbug makes a squeeze very difficult
because the Pillbug can move adjacent bugs. But occasionally
you may force your opponent to use this special ability to
your benefit.
Take a look at the situation from the 2013 tournament game
T!HV-stepanzo-ringersoll-2013-06-14-1515. In this position
the Black Queen is located at the bottom of a stack of Beetles
and the friendly Pillbug is too far away to be able to rescue
her. But Black finds a way to force the White Pillbug to move
the Black Queen into position where she can be rescued by
the Black Pillbug.

We start in Figure 7.15.27 where Black Beetle #2 relieves the
cover of White Beetle #1, leaving the White Beetle free to
move. White elects to move into space A.
In Figure 7.15.28 (page 179) Black Beetle #1 covers White
Beetle #1 and now, if it were not for the special power of the

Page 178

Figure 7.15.27
60 bB2 wB2
61 wB1 bB1-

61
Q

B

60

A

B

P

by Randy Ingersoll
Pillbug, White would be shutout. But even though it itself
cannot move, the White Pillbug can use its special movement
ability. Unfortunately, the only bug that it can move is the
Black Queen! It is forced to rescue the opposing Queen!

Chapter 7.15 – The Pillbug
Figure 7.15.28
62 bB1 wB1

Now the Black Queen is in a position where the Black Pillbug
can move in and execute a Queen rescue. Figure 7.15.29
shows the Black Pillbug advancing adjacent to the Queen and
with White continuing to be shutout, Black will complete the
rescue on the next turn. With the Queen rescued and any
threat for a White victory or a draw gone, Black easily
proceeds to force the victory.

62 B
B

Counter the opposing Pillbug with a squeeze. You
may be able to force the Pillbug into an unfavorable
move or even force it to rescue your own Queen!

7.15.6 – The Self Pin

P
Figure 7.15.29
72 bP1 wQ/

What happens when the opposing Pillbug threatens to move
your Queen into a dangerous, potentially deadly position?
The counter to this threat may be a self pin! Move or place
one of your own bugs to stop the opposing Pillbug from
moving your Queen.

72

P

This is the case in Figure 7.15.30 from the game HV-guestringersoll-2013-05-25-2120.

On turn 27 the White Beetle continues its approach toward the
Black Queen. The danger is that the White Pillbug can pick
up the Black Queen and deposit her into space A. In this space
she would have three of the six spaces around her already
filled and with the next move, she would be covered by White
Beetle #1. This is definitely a very dangerous situation for
Black!
The proper defense is shown on turn 28 when Black Spider #2
is placed in space B. Not only does this stop the White Pillbug
from moving the Black Queen into space A, it also threatens
to move into space C.
It seldom happens, but a good player is always on the
lookout for the opportunity to use a self pin to negate
the power of the opposing Pillbug.

B

P
Figure 7.15.30
27 wB1 bG1
28 bS2 bQ/
28

B
C
27
G

A

P

Page 179

Chapter 7.15 – The Pillbug

7.15.7 – The Double Pin

Due to its ability to move an adjacent bug, the
Pillbug is very difficult to pin. With any other bug, a
pin is an effective and long term method for
immobilizing it and reducing its effectiveness.
But the Pillbug is a different story. True, a Pillbug
may not immediately move a bug that has just pinned
it, but given time, it can move the pinning bug away.

Play Hive® Like a Champion

Figure 7.15.31
33 wP1 /wG1
34 bA2 /wP1

B

Q

34

Let’s look at a game showing how Eucalyx, a Master
Hive® player effectively uses the Double Pin to stop
the advance of the opposing Pillbug.

The game is U!HV-ringersoll-Eucalyx-2013-04-271111 and White has a very strong attack going.
In Figure 7.15.31 White places the Pillbug in
position to move into space A. Black immediately
moves Ant #2 to pin and immobilize the Pillbug.
After an intervening move by White, there is the
danger that the White Pillbug will pick up Black
Ant #2 and deposit it into space A. To keep this from
happening, Black places Spider #2 as shown
in Figure 7.15.32. The double pin is in place.
The White Pillbug cannot move, nor can it carry the
Black Ant into attacking position.
When a single pin will not stop the opposing
Pillbug, watch for chances to use a double
pin. This can stop the Pillbug in its tracks.

Page 180

A

33

LMP

Figure 7.15.32
35 wA1 bA136 bS2 /bA2

B

Q

35

36

LMP

by Randy Ingersoll

7.15.8 – Winning a Drawn Game

The Pillbug is definitely not a one-trick pony! We have seen
how it can be used defensively, but it can also be used in an
offensive capacity. One way is to force a win in an otherwise
drawn game. A draw quite often occurs when the opposing
Queens are in close proximity to one another and filling the
final space around one Queen also fills the final space around
the other. By rule this results in a draw.
The most common tactic used against this maneuver is a
squeeze, forcing your opponent to move one of the attacking
bugs, allowing your final bug to win. Add the Pillbug into the
mix and another tactic surfaces as we shall see from the game
U!HV-ringersoll-preve-2013-04-14-2130.
First examine Figure 7.15.33. The Queens are separated by
only one space and both Queens are already surrounded by
five bugs. This game has draw written all over it. The only
defending bug is Black Hopper #2 and if Black attempts to
free it, White Hopper #3 will jump in and take the draw.
But White has a plan, revolving around the Pillbug.

Chapter 7.15 – The Pillbug

Figure 7.15.33
31 wA3 \wA2

31

P
Figure 7.15.34
43 wP1 bA1/
44 bA3 wB2\

43

Figure 7.15.34 shows the situation some moves later after
both players have brought their Pillbugs into the game. Black
attempted to negate the Pillbug advance with Beetle #2, but
White has smartly pinned it. As the White Pillbug advances,
Black has no choice but to defend, pinning White Beetle #2
and placing a block on space A. But it is too late.
On turn 45 in Figure 7.15.35, the White Pillbug extracts
Black Ant #1 and White will win. The immediate threat is the
White Queen advancing into space B followed by White
Hopper #3 into space A. The only defense against this Queen
attack is to cover the White Queen with Black Beetle #1, but
this removes one of the Black attackers and gains tempo for
White. Note also that any Black bug which occupies space C
can be sucked out by the White Pillbug!
This game shows the power of the Pillbug to turn a
drawn game into a victory!

A

44

P
Figure 7.15.35
45 wP1:bA1 wP1/

45

C
B

A

P

Page 181

Chapter 7.15 – The Pillbug

7.15.9 – The Direct Attack

The first two expansion bugs, the Mosquito and the Ladybug,
were definitely offensive weapons in the hands of an
experienced Hive® Master. Because of this, there was a
clamoring within the gaming community to introduce a
defensive bug to counteract the additional attacking strength
of these two expansions.

Play Hive® Like a Champion

Figure 7.15.36
10 bA2 bA111 wP1 -wA1

11

John Yianni designed and introduced the Pillbug as a
primarily defensive piece. But sure enough, it did not take
long for the truly aggressive players to build an attacking
strategy around this new, defensive bug!
The first of these games is T!HV-stepanzo-DrRaven-2013-0627-0201, as depicted in the four figures on this page.

The Direct Attack begins in Figure 7.15.36 as the White
Pillbug advances toward the Black Queen.

Black makes a fatal mistake on turn 14 in Figure 7.15.37.
Not realizing the power of a direct attack, Black Ant #1
moves in to attack the White Queen, making a ring in the
process. But White responds by picking up the Black Queen
and depositing her adjacent to the White Queen. This may
seem counter productive because it brings the two Queens
closer together, a position that quite often results in a draw.
But here, the primary purpose is to get the Black Queen out
of range of the defending Black Pillbug.

Now let’s look at Figure 7.15.38. With White Ant #1 in
position to win the game by moving into space A, Black is
forced to move Ant #1 away on turn 16. On turns 17 and 18,
each player brings in a Spider.

And then in Figure 7.16.39, White Ant #2 attacks on turn 19.
The game is over. If Black does not pin White Spider #1, the
Pillbug is going to move it into space A and win. The only bug
available to pin the Spider is Black Ant #1, and if it releases
the pin on the White Ant, the White Ant moves in for the
victory.
This game is a great example of the attacking power of the
primarily defensive Pillbug.

10

Figure 7.15.37
14 bA1 wQ/
15 wP1:bQ wG1/

P

14

15

P
Figure 7.15.38
16 bA1 wA1/
17 wS1 \wP1
18 bS1 /bA2

16
17

A

18

P
Figure 7.15.39
19 wA2 wQ/

19

A

P

Page 182

by Randy Ingersoll

Chapter 7.15 – The Pillbug

Figure 7.15.40
36 bS2 bA2/
37 wP1 wQ-

Figure 7.15.41
38 bA2 bA3\
39 wP1:wQ wP1\

G

B

G

B

37
39
36
38

P

P

In the second of these games, stepanzo is on the receiving
end of a direct attack from image13, the eventual 2013
BoardSpace champion. Starting with Figure 7.15.40, lets see
how the game (U!HV-image13-stepanzo-2013-05-15-1602)
progresses.

Black finishes a pin replacement to keep White Beetle #2
pinned (turn 36) and free Ant #2. White follows by attacking
with the Pillbug (turn 37)!

In Figure 7.15.41, Black Ant #2 attacks, but the White
Pillbug lifts up the White Queen and moves her in for the
attack! With White Beetle #1 atop the hive and White Ant #1
mobile, Black is doomed.
Pay attention and be on guard for the Direct Attack.
The defensive Pillbug can turn into an offensive
powerhouse in the hands on an aggressive Hive®
player.

Figure 7.15.42
64 bG2 bB2/
65 wP1:wA2 bG2/
A
65

7.15.10 – Bringing a Trapped Bug into
the Game

There are many tactics available to the Pillbug that are not
easily categorized as either a defensive tactic or an offensive
one. The first of these is bringing an otherwise trapped and
useless bug back into the game. The following three games
demonstrate how this can be done.

G

64

P

Page 183

Chapter 7.15 – The Pillbug
Let’s start with T!HV-Kobajagi-ringersoll-2013-05-12-1950
as shown in Figure 7.15.42 (page 183). White Ant #2 is
hopelessly pinned and currently useless for either attack or
defense. Black however makes a mistake allowing the White
Pillbug to show off its power!

Play Hive® Like a Champion
Figure 7.15.43
42 bP1:bA3 \bP1

After the Black hopper moves as shown on turn 64, the White
Pillbug rescues White Ant #2, moving it out to space A.
The White Ant is free, the Black Hopper is pinned and as
we shall see in Section 7.15.11 – Adjusting Placement of a
Friendly Bug, the White Pillbug is in position to use its power
again, all on the way to a well earned White victory.
A second demonstration of the Pillbug’s ability to extract an
Ant from a blocked position is Figure 7.15.43 from the game
U!HV-blefinjo-guest-2013-05-19-1053. On turn 42, the Black
Pillbug moves Black Ant #3 into the clear and Black moved
on to win.
And finally, from the game U!HV-Kobajagi-ringersoll2013-05-10-2220, we have Figure 7.15.44. In the position
shown, Black Ant #2 is free to move, but where can it go?
The proximity of the two arms of the hive forms an
impassable gate, blocking the Ant in. But the Pillbug gives
the Ant a chance.
By moving as shown on turn 68, the Black Ant has put itself
into position for the Pillbug to carry it into space A. And from
space A, it is free to move around the hive.
When is a trapped bug not trapped? When a friendly
Pillbug can use its special power to free it! Watch for
these opportunities and then watch victories come
pouring in!

Page 184

42

B

P
Figure 7.15.44
68 bA2 wA2-

A

68

B

Q

P

by Randy Ingersoll

Chapter 7.15 – The Pillbug

7.15.11 – Adjusting Placement of
a Friendly Bug

What does a player do when a Spider or Hopper cannot reach
the optimum space required? Without the Pillbug, one just
curses and says, “Oh, well!” But with the Pillbug, it may be
as simple as moving the bug to a different location.

Figure 7.15.45
White to move
A1
B1

We can see this well illustrated in Figure 7.15.45 from the
game T!HV-Kobajagi-ringersoll-2013-05-12-1950. White
would love to get Spider #2 into attacking position on the
Black Queen. It would be great if the Spider could get into
either space A or space B. Unfortunately, with its strictly
limited movement, it cannot get to either of these spaces.

A

But using the Pillbug, White can shift the Spider to space A1
or to space B1. From space A1 the Spider can easily reach
space A. And from space B1 it can easily reach space B.
Kobajagi chose the later and moved the Spider into its
intended space.

Our second example comes from the game U!HV-Queribusringersoll-2013-04-05-2155 and is shown in Figure 7.15.46.
Black is on the verge of winning but needs to get a final bug
into space A. White has set up an effective block on this
space, keeping Black Ant #2 out. Black Beetle #1 and Black
Ant #3 are both adequately pinned. The only bug that has the
ability to get into this space is Black Hopper #3, but even with
a hop around, it is not targeting this game winning spot.
With the Pillbug, however, Black moves the Hopper into
space B as shown on turn 42 and with the Hopper into
position to attack and safely tucked into a pocket and
therefore immune from a pin, White had no chance and
resigned.
When a bug is not correctly placed to get to its
intended destination, look for your Pillbug to adjust
its placement. Do this and your win percentage will
climb!

B

G

A

P
Figure 7.15.46
42 bP1:bG3 bG1/
43 White resigns

P

A

B

B
42

P

Page 185

Chapter 7.15 – The Pillbug

7.15.12 – Creating a Fill

Expert Hive® players know how to use a fill to free up an
attacking bug. With the Pillbug in one’s arsenal the use of this
offensive tool is greatly enhanced. This will be demonstrated
by the next two games.
In the game T!HV-reh191-ringersoll-2013-05-04-0959, as
seen in Figure 7.15.47, Black seems to have run out of bugs.
There are two spaces to fill around the White Queen.
Beetle #1 is sitting atop the hive prepared to occupy one of
these spaces, but Black has no mobile bug available to use to
force the victory.

Play Hive® Like a Champion

Figure 7.15.47
55 wA1 bG1/
56 bP1:wG1 bP1/
55
56

A

But the Pillbug saves the game. Even though the Pillbug itself
cannot move, it can pick up White Hopper #1 and move it as
shown here. Moving the White Hopper executes a fill
in relation to Black Hopper #1 which is now free to attack
the White Queen. Black chalks up another victory to the
offensive power of the mighty Pillbug.
Image13, the 2013 BoardSpace champion, shows his prowess
with the Pillbug in Figure 7.15.48. This figure is from the
game U!HV-ringersoll-image13-2013-05-12-1249.

Not satisfied with having the Mosquito and one Beetle atop
the hive, image spots the opportunity to use the Pillbug to
force the second Beetle up on the hive. Shifting White Ant #2
into space A, creates the fill and the pin by White Ant #3 has
been negated. Black Beetle #2 climbs atop the hive and with
three powerful bugs up on the hive, image easily forces the
victory against the helpless author!
The Fill is a powerful offensive weapon. Use the
Pillbug to create one, free an important friendly bug,
and victory will soon be yours.

Page 186

B

P
Figure 7.15.48
25 wA3 \bB2
26 bP1:wA2 bP1/

25

A
26

L

B

LMP

by Randy Ingersoll

7.15.13 – Making A Ring

‘Rings are bad’ is a maxim learned early on by most Hive®
players, except of course when they are good. With the
Pillbug added to the hive, the opportunity for a good ring
occurs more often, both offensively and defensively. Watch
how, in these next two games, a good ring in conjunction with
the Pillbug results in victory.
The first is from the game U!HV-guest-ringersoll-2013-0416-0058 and can be seen in Figure 7.15.49. Black Ant #1
moves in to form the ring, while at the same time attacking
the White Queen. One of the identifying factors of a good ring
is whether any opposing bugs are freed by the ring. In this
case only Black bugs are freed! The Black Ladybug is free but
will soon be covered by White Beetle #2, while the Black
Queen, even though she is blocked in, can be moved away
by the adjacent Pillbug. When the Black Queen escapes to
space A, a string of White bugs is left behind and Black was
able to continue on to victory.
In the next game (T!HV-ringersoll-Kobajagi-2013-05-191901) White safely makes the ring with the Pillbug placement
(See Figure 7.15.50.) because a Black Beetle has just covered
the Ladybug, the only Black bug freed by the ring. The
Pillbug is now in position to be used either offensively to
attack the Black Queen or defensively to rescue the White
Queen.
Two moves later, in Figure 7.15.51 after both players have
moved their Beetles, Black attacks with Ant #2 and White
does a direct drop of Beetle #2, forming another ring!

In Figure 7.15.52 Black actually threatens to win when the
Ladybug attacks, but the well placed White Pillbug removes
the White Queen and White will win easily. Another direct
drop, this time into space A, and plenty of bugs in reserve was
too much for Black to defend. Black fell on his sword, ending
the game on turn 34.
Not all rings are bad! When a Pillbug is nearby and
able to rescue the friendly Queen or strip off an
attacker, a ring may be a game saving tactic.

Chapter 7.15 – The Pillbug

Figure 7.15.49
24 bA1 wQ/
25 wB2 bL1

24

G

25

A

Figure 7.15.50
18 bB1 bL1
19 wP1 wB1/

LMP

19

L

18

LP
Figure 7.15.51
22 bA2 wQ/
23 wB2 wA1/

22

23

L

Q

LP
Figure 7.15.52
24 bL1 wP1/
25 wP1:wQ -wP1
25
L

24

Q

A

LP

Page 187

Chapter 7.15 – The Pillbug

7.15.14 – Hurrying a Bug

Still another use of the Pillbug is to hurry along a slow
moving bug, getting it into position faster than would
normally occur. In Figure 7.15.53 in a game that we have
previously seen (U!HV-kkurtonis-ringersoll-2013-05-082142), Black Beetle #1 is moving in and is threatening to
cover the White Queen. The White Queen can easily move
away but using the White Pillbug will hurry her along and get
her out of range of the Black Beetle much more quickly.
On her own, the White Queen will reach space A in four turns.
But the Pillbug can get her there in just one! In many
situations this savings in tempo can mean the difference
between victory and defeat.

Play Hive® Like a Champion

Figure 7.15.53
32 bB1 bS1
33 wP1:wQ wP1\

32

S

33

This tactic usually will apply only to the Queen or Beetle
because they are typically limited to moving just one space at
a time. But it can also speed up a spider if the Pillbug can pick
it up from one side of a line of bugs and deposit it on the other.

A

P

Save tempo by using the Pillbug. Let it pick up a
slow moving bug and hurry it along and you may
be speeding onward to victory.

7.15.15 – The Pillbug and the Mosquito

Whenever potential expansion bugs have been proposed by
Hive ® players around the world, the discussion would
inevitably gravitate toward the interaction of the new bug
with the Mosquito. One of the primary subjects discussed is
whether the Mosquito should inherit any special ability of a
new bug or just its movement pattern. With the introduction
of the Pillbug, it seems that this question has been answered.
Yes, the Mosquito inherits, not just the movement pattern, but
the special power of the Pillbug.

Figure 7.15.54
31 wG1 wQ32 bP1 -bM1

This creates some very interesting and complex situations as
we shall see as we review the following four games.
Let’s start with HV-fabian-stepanzo-2013-07-20-1003.
A quick glance at Figure 7.15.54 would seem to show that
White has an easily won position. The Black Queen is
covered by the White Mosquito, there is a White Ant in
reserve, the only bug available to stop the White Ladybug is
Black Ant #3 (but doing so will free the White Queen), and
Page 188

L

Q

31

B

32

LMP

by Randy Ingersoll

Chapter 7.15 – The Pillbug

Figure 7.15.55
33 wL1 wA2/
34 bP1 wQ\

Figure 7.15.56
35 wM1 bM1/
36 bP1:wG1 bA3\
33

B

L

L

Q

A

35

36

A

34
B

B

LMP

White Beetle #2 is atop the hive and ready to climb down.
The White attack should be quick and decisive.
But this game is played with the Pillbug and even though
White eventually wins, the Black Pillbug makes this an
interesting and complex ending.

After the White Ladybug attacks on turn 33 (Figure 7.15.55),
the Black Pillbug moves into stripping position. (See Section
7.15.2 – Stripping an Attacker.)

Because Beetle #2 must keep the Black Ladybug covered to
the very end, space A must be the next space filled. But when
it is filled on turn 35 (Figure 7.15.56) the Black Pillbug strips
out the White Hopper. (As a side note here, by rule, the Black
Pillbug cannot move the White Mosquito because it has just
moved. See the special rule on page 12.)
Now in Figure 7.15.57 the White Mosquito, inheriting the
special power of the adjacent Pillbug, picks up the White
Pillbug and places it in the space just vacated by White
Hopper #1. The Black Pillbug responds by stripping out the
White Mosquito. But in Figure 7.15.58, the White Pillbug
moves the Black Pillbug into space A and the game will end
on Black’s next turn. (Note, too, here that because it was just
moved, the Black Pillbug cannot use its power to rescue the
Black Queen or strip away White Ant #2.)

This game clearly shows the complex interactions that can
occur when two Pillbugs interact with the pesky Mosquito!

LMP
Figure 7.15.57
37 wM1:wP1 bP1/
38 bP1:wM1 wG1\
L

37
38

A

B

LMP
Figure 7.15.58
39 wP1:bP1 bM1/

L

39

A

B

LMP

Page 189

Chapter 7.15 – The Pillbug
The Pillbug-Mosquito pair, when adjacent the friendly
Queen, can be an extremely effective defensive combination.
Benihona shows how this pair can quickly switch from
defense to offense in the game U!HV-Benihona-fabian-201306-27-1745.
Even with the White Queen covered by Black Beetle #1
and a direct drop of Black Ant #2 on turn 20, the two White
bugs work together to pull out a victory. Please refer to
Figure 7.15.59 where we see White Beetle #1 moving in to
counter attack.

When Black threatens to win after Ant #1 attacks on turn 22
(Figure 7.15.60), the White Mosquito, acting like a Pillbug,
picks up the White Pillbug and deposits it into space A. This
move both clears a space adjacent to the White Queen and
fills a space adjacent to the Black Queen: truly a dual purpose
move.

Play Hive® Like a Champion
Figure 7.15.59
20 bA2 -bB1
21 wB1 /bQ
Q

20

21

LMP
Figure 7.15.60
22 bA1 bM123 wM1:wP1 bA1-

23
Q

A

22

Now White is threatening to win. The Black Ladybug is
forced to move. And even though she immediately attacks,
White has won. Figure 7.15.61 shows the White Mosquito
moving in to attack and Black does not have enough
defenders to stop White from completing the conquest of the
Black Queen.

LMP
Figure 7.15.61
24 bL1 bB1/
25 wM1 wP1/

24

Q

25

LMP

Page 190

by Randy Ingersoll
And yet again, the power of the Pillbug and Mosquito on the
attack is demonstrated in Figure 7.15.62, from the game
T!HV-ringersoll-stepanzo-2013-06-23-1000. Black first
attacks with the Mosquito (turn 10) and then places the
Pillbug (turn 12).

Chapter 7.15 – The Pillbug
Figure 7.15.62
10 bM1 wQ/
11 wA2 wA112 bP1 \bM1
11
12

10

Examine the situation after turn 15 (Figure 7.15.63) when the
White Pillbug joins the fray.

The danger for White of the Pillbug-Mosquito combination is
clearly shown in Figure 7.15.64. The White Queen has five
spaces filled; only one to go for Black to win. If White ever
fills space A and completes the ring, the Black Mosquito will
pick up the White Pillbug and move it in for the victory.
White must fight hard to defend. Unfortunately for ringersoll,
all stepanzo needed to win the tournament match was a draw,
and with careful play, he forced a draw and won the match.

LMP
Figure 7.15.63
15 wP1 bM1-

15

LMP
Figure 7.15.64
22 bP1:bS1 /bP1
B

22

A

LMP

Page 191

Chapter 7.15 – The Pillbug
And finally, Figure 7.15.65 from the game U!HVLadyBrawne-ringersoll-2013-05-16-2336, shows another
instructive Pillbug-Mosquito interaction. In a defensive
situation, Black places the Pillbug as shown, in order to give
the Black Mosquito the ability to rescue the Black Queen.
And, sure enough, when White Hopper #3 jumps in to attack,
the Black Mosquito pulls out the Black Queen, placing her
into space A.
The Pillbug-Mosquito combination forms a very
powerful duo, both on offense and defense. Learn
to maximize their combined power and you will
also maximize your victory totals.

7.15.16 – Conclusion
The Pillbug is, without a doubt, the most complex
of all the bugs in the hive. With this new bug in
the mix, the game has changed completely.
To be successful, a player must continually keep
the Pillbug in mind, both one’s own and one’s
opponent’s.

Page 192

Play Hive® Like a Champion
Figure 7.15.65
24 bP1 bM125 wG3 wG1-

24

25

A

LMP

by Randy Ingersoll

Chapter 7.16 – Psychology in the Hive

Chapter 7.16 – Psychology in the Hive
A wise man wrote: “the swift do not always win the race, nor
do the mighty win the battle... because time and unexpected
events overtake them all.” In the game of Hive® the better
player does not always win. And some of those games are
won because of psychological and mental situations, not
because of positions that occur on the board. Let’s examine
some of the psychological aspects of this fantastic game.

7.16.1 – Physical Conditioning and
Mental Preparedness

Needless to say physical conditioning and mental
preparedness are important aspects of the game, especially
when playing in a tournament. Playing when tired or not
feeling totally up to par will more than likely result in a
sub-par performance: fewer wins, more losses. When playing
ranked games on BoardSpace, beware of playing when you
are overly tired. A loss to a lower rated player may result in a
substantial drop in a player’s rating! When getting tired or not
feeling well, play unranked games or don’t play at all.

An example of a loss caused by playing while not feeling well
is demonstrated in Figure 7.16.1, from the game HV-meche5ringersoll-2010-09-20-2228. The author, playing Black, was
playing against a relatively new player. He totally overlooked
White’s excellent use of a fill (Chapter 6.4) by Ant #2 to free
Beetle #1 for the final assault against the Black Queen!
Don’t be overwhelmed by playing against a higher rated
opponent. In the 2011 BoardSpace Tournament, the top
players in the world lost four games in the preliminary
rounds, all against lower rated players. The best way to
improve is to continually play the better players. Continually
playing BoardSpace’s Dumbot will teach you the basics and
possibly increase your win totals, but it will never make you
into a true Hive® Master.

Figure 7.16.1
46 bG2 bA3/
47 wA2 wS1\
B

47

46

S

Mistakes happen. Don’t beat yourself up when you lose a
game on a stupid move. Even the best players in the world do
that occasionally. Using golf as an example, the experts say
that one of the qualities that allowed champion golfer Tiger
Woods to play at such a high level for such a long period of
time was his ability to not let one bad shot affect the next.

Page 193

Chapter 7.16 – Psychology in the Hive

Play Hive® Like a Champion

Put a bad game or a bad move behind you and move on. Don’t
let one bad move lead to another and another and another.

Train yourself to examine a line of play, determine whether it
is good or not, and make a decision. Don’t waste time going
back and reexamining lines of play that you have already
determined to be poor. If your opponent makes an unexpected
move, things may change and previously discarded lines of
play may need to be reconsidered. But under normal
circumstances, be decisive.

When your opponent does something totally unexpected there
are two possible responses. Strictly from a tactical standpoint
it may seem that taking extra time to examine the situation
may be the best. But from a psychological standpoint,
responding quickly may make your opponent think that you
had already considered this line, judged that it was favorable
to you and planned a counter. This may psyche your opponent
out and force him to take more time than necessary or
possibly even change his plans completely.
When playing seriously, prepare yourself physically
and mentally. You will soon find yourself winning
more and losing less.

7.16.2 – Never Give Up

“Never, never, never give up” is one of Sir Winston
Churchill’s more famous quotations and it applies to the game
of Hive® as well. Although there are situations when playing
against a superior opponent when a defeat is inevitable and
falling on one’s sword is acceptable, in most cases one should
play to the bitter end. Even a Hive® Master will occasionally
make a serious mistake. This next game from the BoardSpace
2011 Online Tournament will give an example.

Let’s set the circumstances. Fumanchu and ringersoll are
playing in the semi-finals. Fumanchu is leading 3-2 with one
draw. So far in the match Black has not won, so indications
are that the first player to win as Black will win the match.
If Fumanchu wins, the match is over and he proceeds into the
finals. If ringersoll wins, he survives to fight another day.

We will pick up the game (T!HV-ringersoll-Fumanchu-201107-02-2014) in Figure 7.16.2 at turn 38. Up to this point, this
has been an excellent game with attacking chances on both
sides. White is only one move from winning but Black has
defended well with pins on the White Ladybug and White
Page 194

Figure 7.16.2
38 bG3 wS1/

38

B

G

A

L

by Randy Ingersoll
Beetle #2 and space B well protected by a block (Chapter
6.3). White has two Hoppers in reserve but there is no
place to place a Hopper to threaten space B, even using a
hop around (Chapter 7.9). Black jumps in with Hopper #3
and now threatens to win with either Beetle #1 or Ant #1
moving into space A.

Chapter 7.16 – Psychology in the Hive
Figure 7.16.3
39 wS1 -bB1

Ringersoll was depressed, mentally beaten, and ready to
resign. In fact he had already selected ‘Resign’ from the
BoardSpace menu and had the cursor over the ‘Done’
button! But then, he forced himself to regroup, change his
mental attitude, and rethink the situation. There was a
possible plan to get a Hopper into space B.
The only defense to an immediate loss was moving White
Spider #1 and the only possible chance was moving it as
shown in Figure 7.16.3.

And then, the big mistake! Black Beetle #1 moved to
cover the White Queen. Black was no doubt planning
to bring a bug from the reserve directly into either
space A or space C, followed by the Black Beetle winning
the game. But the entry of the White Hopper on turn 41
(Figure 7.16.4) was totally overlooked.

B

G

A
39

L
Figure 7.16.4
40 bB1 wQ
41 wG2 -wS1

41

Now, White Hopper #2 is threatening to jump into
space B. If Black Ant #1 pins the Hopper, then the White
Ladybug wins the game. Black actually elected to pin the
White Hopper with Black Hopper #3, but this opened the
gate protecting space B and White Ant #2 moved in for the
win.
HV-bird-ringersoll-2010-12-03-2326 shows another
example of mentally giving up. Figure 7.16.5 shows an
endgame situation where Black has been on the defense
the entire game. Finally on turn 40, a Black threat forces
the White Hopper move on turn 41 as shown. Now
White’s threat to win is: the Ladybug into space A and
then the dual threat of Hopper #1 or Ant #3 into the space
vacated by the Ladybug. Under stress and giving up,
Black attempted a failed defense with the Mosquito
climbing atop White Beetle #1.
If instead, Black had pressed the attack, there was no
defense for White! With three Black Ant’s mobile and
only two spaces to fill, the Black attack was destined to
succeed. But Black had given up mentally and lost a
winnable game!

B

G 40

A

C

L
Figure 7.16.5
40 bG1 wG141 wG1 wB2-

40

41

A

LM

Page 195

Chapter 7.16 – Psychology in the Hive
Never give up! Watch for the counter attack and wait
for a mistake! Even Hive® Masters make game-losing
mistakes!

Play Hive® Like a Champion
Figure 7.16.6
6 bM1 bL1-

7.16.3 – Do the Unexpected

Continuing with the semi-final tournament match between
Fumanchu and ringersoll; we will next demonstrate how
doing the unexpected can produce benefits. Fumanchu and
ringersoll are BoardSpace friends and regularly play against
one another. It is safe to say that they are intimately
acquainted with each other’s style of play. Knowing that he
was going to have to do something different in order to win,
ringersoll opened game eight of their match (T!HVFumanchu-ringersoll-2011-07-03-1907) with an inferior,
3-bug defense. (See Figure 7.16.6.)

The basic philosophy of the 3-bug defense is to get the Black
Queen one space farther away from the White Ladybug while
at the same time keeping two good defenders (Ladybug and
Mosquito) adjacent the Queen. It also has the advantage of
typically providing more choices for Black to bring in new
bugs. With proper play, however, this opening has proven to
give an advantage to White, and with the Queens separated by
at least two spaces, Black’s drawing chances have been
reduced.

But in this case, facing an unexpected Black opening, White
played a less than optimal attack. Figure 7.16.7 shows
as each player brings in their fourth bug. White brings in
Hopper #1 and by rule, Black must bring in the Queen. As we
shall see as the game progresses, Black will use space A and
space B to safely and effectively bring new bugs into the
game.
In Figure 7.16.8, we see the White assault of the Black Queen
begins with White Ant #1. Black uses space B to bring in the
first defending Ant.

B

LM
Figure 7.16.7
7 wG1 /wQ
8 bQ bL1/

8

A

7

B

LM
Figure 7.16.8
9 wA1 \bQ
10 bA1 bL1\

9

A
10

LM
Figure 7.16.9
13 wA2 wG1\
14 bA2 bL1\
15 wA2 bA2\

A few moves later we come to Figure 7.16.9. Both players
have brought in their second Ant. Then, White Ant #2 pins
Black Ant #2. As the game continues, it becomes evident that
space C would have been a better pin placement because it
restricts Black new bug placement in space A.

A
13

Page 196

6

A

14

C
15

LM

by Randy Ingersoll

Chapter 7.16 – Psychology in the Hive

Black now uses space A to bring in Ant #3 (Figure 7.16.10)
and White follows suit by also bringing in his third Ant. It is
interesting to note that not only have all three Black Ants
entered the game through either space A or space B (as
labeled in Figure 7.16.7 on page 196), but the game winner,
Black Beetle #1, will do so also.

The game ends in Figure 7.16.11 as Black Hopper #3 attacks.
Black has two threats to occupy space D. The first is the direct
and immediate threat posed by Black Hopper #1. It can be
stopped by a pin by one of the White Ants (not White Ant #1,
however, because that opens the gate and allows Black Ant #2
access to the game ending space). But the second threat, the
one posed by Black Beetle #1 cannot be stopped and White
resigned.
This game has shown a good example of a game
won, not by the better player, but by the player who
did the unexpected.

7.16.4 – Using the Clock

The next psychological tactic to be discussed only really
comes into play during tournament games when a clock is
being used. In BoardSpace tournaments, a player loses on
time when his total time is both greater than thirty minutes
and more than ten minutes greater than his opponent’s time.
This creates some situations where one player is forced to
play quickly or possibly lose on time.

Figure 7.16.10
16 bA3 bS1\
17 wA3 wG1\

17

16

LM
Figure 7.16.11
38 bG3 bA339 white resigns

D
38

LM

Remember that when it is your turn and your clock is running,
your opponent is using your time to analyze the situation.
When your opponent is short on time, playing quickly puts
additional time pressure on him. This may result in mistakes
that can be turned into victories.
Let’s go back to the game discussed in the previous section
(T!HV-Fumanchu-ringersoll-2011-07-03-1907). Fumanchu
and ringersoll are both known for taking their time and not
playing quickly. In fact, some of their friendly games have
lasted well over sixty minutes. This no doubt had an influence
on the outcome of this game. Whereas, ringersoll had studied
the opening and knew what he was going to do and therefore
was able to play quickly through the opening few moves,
Fumanchu did not expect this opening and spent more
time planning his first few moves. This resulted in less time
available for analyzing later in the game.

Page 197

Chapter 7.16 – Psychology in the Hive
This, no doubt, benefited ringersoll and helped him achieve a
match changing victory. The final times for this game were:
Fumanchu, 29:42; ringersoll, 14:54.

Play Hive® Like a Champion
Figure 7.16.12
46 bB2 wA2
47 wS1 bQ/

A second example is the game T!HV-Loizz-ringersoll-201106-13-2246 seen previously in Chapter 7.11 – Using Your
Spiders. In this game, ringersoll, under time pressure at the
end, lost a game that might have had drawing chances.

In Figure 7.16.12 Black makes a deadly error. With
two Beetles atop the hive and in good defensive position,
ringersoll chooses to move away with Beetle #2, hoping
to bring the final Black Hopper into the game in a good
defensive position. Unfortunately, under time pressure, he
makes a huge mistake. White attacks with Spider #1 and
Black is forced to immediately bring the Beetle back to
defend the Queen. Black lost two vital tempi, and soon lost
the game!
In tournament games, good clock management can
lead to additional victories. Use the clock wisely and
win.

7.16.5 – Conclusion
Hive®, when played at a top level, can be more than
just a fun, family table game. It can be a mental and
psychological conflict. Learn to use psychological
tactics and wins will come in greater number.

Page 198

A

A

47

46
A

L

by Randy Ingersoll

Chapter 7.17 – The Pin Revisited

Chapter 7.17 – The Pin Revisited
The study of tactics for the game of Hive® has now come full
circle. The first tactic learned by most beginning Hive®
players, and therefore the first tactic discussed in Chapter 6.1,
was The Pin. And now the last tactic discussed will be The Pin
Revisited.

When playing on BoardSpace against a top ranked opponent,
a beginner may see the expert move an Ant into a pinning
position and leave it there for a moment while examining the
position. Quite often the expert will then pick up the Ant,
move it to another position, and spend some more time
examining this second position. All of this before making the
final decision and clicking ‘Done.’ Many beginners wonder,
“What’s the difference between this pinning position and that
pinning position?”
After studying all the tactics available in the hive, an
experienced player can answer this question and will then
begin to make pin placements that have better long term
consequences. With these better pin placements will come
better play and eventually, more victories.

The following sections will review eight previous chapters in
the light of making final pin placement decisions. As we
review some of the games discussed in earlier chapters, one
will see that it is typically the Ant (or a Mosquito moving like
an Ant) that is the bug under consideration. This, of course, is
because the Ant’s superior mobility gives it more choice when
placing a pin. Occasionally, a Ladybug may have a choice of
pin placement locations. But because of their limited
movement abilities, Hoppers and Spiders rarely, if ever, have
any choice.

7.17.1 – Pin Replacement

The pin replacement is a very basic tactic that beginning
Hive® players typically learn very quickly. But there are some
nuances to this tactic that take longer to learn. Let’s revisit the
game U!HV-Eucalyx-ringersoll-2010-08-29-1321 which was
used in Chapter 6.1 – The Pin to demonstrate the classic pin
replacement. Looking back at Figure 7.1.5 on page 69, you
can see how White used this tactic to release an Ant, which
was then used to pin two Black bugs.

Figure 7.17.1
12 bA2 \bS1
13 wA1 ??
A

B

C

D

12

E

13

S

Page 199

Chapter 7.17 – The Pin Revisited

Play Hive® Like a Champion

Figure 7.17.1 (page 199) takes us back to turn 13 when White
Ant #1 initially places the pin on Black Ant #2. White has two
choices. The first choice is to pin from space B, with a plan
later to bring in a Hopper or Spider to space A. The end result
would be a pin from space C.
The second choice is to pin with the Ant from space C, bring
in the new bug to space D, and place the final pin into
space B. Is there a difference? If so, what is it?

Space E is the key. Currently this space is vacant. But it is
very easy for Black to place a Hopper in space E. And here is
the potential problem for White. If the White Ant were to pin
from space B, and Black were to place a Hopper in space E,
then White would be forced to allow the Hopper to pin Ant #1
or waste a tempo moving the Ant again. Recognizing this,
Eucalyx made the correct choice. He placed the pin by White
Ant #1 into space C. The move was 13 wA1 bA2/.

Figure 7.17.2
33 wG2 wS1/
34 bQ -wS1
33

A

A secondary consideration for White is that the Hopper that
ends up in space B will be positioned to attack back into the
middle of the hive later in the game. In fact, Figure 7.17.2
shows this actually happening. Even though the Black Queen
escapes, the White Hopper allows White Beetle #2 to climb
atop the hive and now White has two Beetles atop the hive.
The resulting attack by two Beetles (Chapter 7.10 – Two
Beetle Attack) brought White a well earned victory.

G

34

Choose your pin replacements well and the long term
effect will be losses replaced with victories!

S

7.17.2 – Beetle Cover

Proper pin placement is also important when defending
against a Beetle cover (Chapter 6.2). In the game HVringersoll-Fumanchu-2011-02-18-1224, previously
discussed in Section 6.2.2 – The Cover – Direct Drop, we see
an earlier pin placement decision by ringersoll that had long
term negative consequences later in the game after
Fumanchu had successfully executed the cover.
Figure 7.17.3 shows Black’s first attempt to bring in an
attacking Beetle and White’s planned pin. With a free Ant
ready for defense, there was no question that White would
place the pin. The question was, “From which space would
the pin be placed?”

Page 200

Figure 7.17.3
12 bB1 \bA1
13 wA2 ??

B

13

A
12

C

D

S

by Randy Ingersoll

Chapter 7.17 – The Pin Revisited

Typically speaking, an inline pin is best (space B). An inline
pin does a better job of both limiting new bug placement and
reducing the future chances of a fill freeing the pinned bug.
With the inline pin, Black bugs cannot be brought into play in
either space A or space C. In addition, if Black attempts a fill
to free Beetle #1 it would take two bugs to do it. With this
reasoning, White chose space B.
The problem however surfaced later when Black covers the
White Queen. With White Ant #1 pinning from space B and
the White Queen covered, space D is open to a direct drop
attack (Section 6.2.2 – The Cover – Direct Drop). If, however,
White had pinned the Black Beetle from space A, then the
White Ant would prevent this from happening. Go back to
Section 6.2.2 to see how this game eventually turned out.

Sometimes it is the pin that you don’t place that costs you the
game. Looking at Figure 7.17.4 from the game HVFumanchu-ringersoll-2011-02-26-2041, we see White
placing Beetle #1 in position to climb atop the hive. Black
Ant #3 is available to place the pin, but Black instead elects
to bring in another bug. This allows the White Beetle to climb
up and the rest was history! For details, see the discussion
about this game in Section 7.10.3 – Two Beetle Attack –
Double Cover.
Choosing your pin placement wisely will lead to
better defense against a Beetle cover. This, in turn,
will lead to more wins!

Figure 7.17.4
19 wB1 /wQ

19

LM

Page 201

Chapter 7.17 – The Pin Revisited

7.17.3 – Defensive Block

It is relatively easy to see the relationship between pin
placement and The Block (Chapter 6.3) because most gates
are formed by the placement of a pin. Sometimes however the
placement of the pin leading to a block must be planned in
advance. In this next example, HV-Desire-ringersoll-201008-17-2054, Black sets a pin to stop the approach of a
threatening Beetle and at the same time prepares for a
defensive block a few moves later. The defensive block
becomes instrumental in victory later in the game!
In Figure 7.17.5 we see White Beetle #2 entering the game
and threatening to advance toward the Black Queen. Black
is going to pin with Ant #1. But from which space should it
be done? Space B has the advantage that it limits White
bug placement is both space A and space C. Considering the
long term defense of the Black Queen, however, Black chose
space A.
And then, when White Ant #2 entered the game as shown in
Figure 7.17.6, Black completed the block by pinning the
newly placed White Ant with Black Ant #2. Both space A and
space B are now well protected behind the block and White’s
defense held off the Black attack.

Play Hive® Like a Champion

Figure 7.17.5
11 wB2 /wA1
12 bA1 ??
12

A
B
11

M

Figure 7.17.6
13 wA2 /wB1
14 bA2 /wA2

13

A
B

When defending, an expert player takes time to look
ahead, searching for well placed defensive blocks.

7.17.4 – Counting Bugs

Because it is so basic to a successful Hive® playing career
counting bugs was the first of the advanced tactics considered
back in Chapter 7.1. Knowing how, when, and where to place
a pin to gain in the bug count can be a critical skill.

14

Page 202

M

Figure 7.17.7
37 wS2 /wS1
38 bA3 /wS2

In the game HV-albedo-ringersoll-2010-08-22-1936, Black
effectively reduces White’s attacking strength by one bug by
the timely placement of a pin. Interestingly, the placement of
one pin required the release of another pin. Let’s see how this
worked as demonstrated in Figure 7.17.7.

White has just placed Spider #2. The threat is to move into
space A and attack the Black Queen. This move also fills the
elbow and releases White Beetle #1. If allowed to happen, this
maneuver will result in two additional bugs attacking the
Black Queen. To counter this threat, Black pins Spider #2
with Ant #3. This releases White Ant #2 to move. But Ant #2

C

A

38

37

S

by Randy Ingersoll

Chapter 7.17 – The Pin Revisited

is already in an attacking position. When Ant #2 moves into
space A and Beetle #1 is released, White only gains one
attacking bug, rather than two.
This game aptly illustrates how a properly placed
pin can reduce an attacker’s strength and aid in
counting up another victory.

7.17.5 – Control Bug Placement

Proper pin placement allows a top notch Hive® player to
control the bug placement of his opponent. As was discussed
in Chapter 7.3 – Controlling Bug Placement, this can be
instrumental in winning.
The game that will now be discussed (HV-Dragonflyringersoll-2010-10-21-0036) was seen previously in Chapter
7.14 – The Ladybug. But here, the game will illustrate how a
misplaced pin failed to control new bug placement by White
and resulted in a loss for Black.

Black is doing an excellent job of controlling the outside of
the hive and has a huge advantage in mobility. All three Black
Ants and the Black Mosquito (acting like an Ant) are mobile.
The only place that White can bring in a new bug is adjacent
to White Spider #2.
White Hopper #2 enters the game on turn 29 as shown in
Figure 7.17.8. And now Black will pin the Hopper with
Ant #3. The obvious question is, “From which space should
the Black Ant place the pin?” But the more important
question is, “Which space poses the biggest threat for White
to place new bugs?”

The answer is that space D is the critical space. Why?
Because any new White bugs brought into space D cannot be
pinned! Due to the close proximity of the branch of the hive
containing the White Queen, any attempt to pin a bug brought
into the game via space D will result in the formation of a
ring. The formation of this ring would have disastrous
consequences for Black!
To have any chance of winning, Black must place the pin
from space A and control bug placement into space D.
Unfortunately, Black placed the pin in space C with the move
30 bA3 wG2/ and soon lost.

Figure 7.17.8
29 wG2 \wS2
30 bA3 ??
B
A

C

29

E
D

30

LM

Page 203

Chapter 7.17 – The Pin Revisited
On turn 31, White Ant #3 enters the game via the critical
space and attacks the Black Queen on turn 33 (Figure 7.17.9).

Play Hive® Like a Champion
Figure 7.17.9
31 wA3 /wG2
32 bS2 -bA3
33 wA3 wB232
31

33

And then, finally, in Figure 7.17.10, the White Ladybug
enters through the same critical, uncontrolled space. And
when she enters she cannot be stopped.
This game definitely highlights the importance of
controlling bug placement by placing the pin from
the correct space!

LM
Figure 7.17.10
35 wL1 /wG2

35

7.17.6 – Making a Ring

Few of the tactics used in the game of Hive® are used in a
vacuum with no relationship to other tactics. Just the opposite
is actually the case. Tactics are often interconnected with one
tactic leading to another and possibly to a third.

In the game HV-lukiejro-ringersoll-2010-07-29-2049,
depicted in Figure 7.17.11 (page 205), we see Black on the
attack but running out of bugs (Chapter 7.1 – Counting Bugs).
The key to White’s defense is Hopper #1 (Chapter 7.2 –
Defending Your Queen). Once the White Hopper is released
and Black’s attack has been stopped, White, with three bugs
in reserve, one Beetle atop the hive, and two mobile Ants, will
easily counter attack (Chapter 7.4). The key to victory, then,
is releasing the White Hopper. And the key to this is the
making of a ring (Chapter 7.6). This is where proper pin
placement enters the picture. Proper pin placement allows the
defensive ring.
Page 204

LM

by Randy Ingersoll
Examining this figure, we see that on turn 36, Black has just
played Beetle #2 with the immediate threat of climbing atop
the hive and possibly beginning an unstoppable attack. Let’s
evaluate White’s defensive possibilities. As previously
mentioned, Black is running out of bugs. There is only one
Black bug in reserve (Spider #2).
White Hopper #1 is currently the focus of a bidirectional pin
(Section 6.1.5), one direction by Black Hopper #1 and the
other direction by White Spider #1. In order to be released,
both of these pins must be relieved. The first will be relieved
when Black attacks with a bug into space A. The second will
be released when a White bug moves into space E and makes
a ring.

Chapter 7.17 – The Pin Revisited
Figure 7.17.11
36 bB2 /bG2
37 wA1 ???

36

C

With the two Black Hoppers well placed to attack, White
must pin with Ant #1, not Ant #3. Notice that if White pins
from space D and then moves a bug into space E, Black
Beetle #2 will be free to move. But if White pins from
space C, the Black Beetle will still be pinned when the ring is
formed.
Figure 7.17.12 shows a few moves later as this series of
events comes to fruition. Black is forced to allow the White
Hopper to escape; White counter attacks and wins.

A
B

D

E

37
A

S
Figure 7.17.12
42 bB1 wQ
43 wA3 bB2\

With proper pin placement, White controls which bugs are
released with the forming of the ring and then goes on to win.

It is interesting to note that this game was played very early
in the author’s Hive® and playing Black, he missed a win. Can
you find it?
A good choice of pin placement, combined with the
formation of a good ring can be your road map to
victory.

43
42

Q

A

S

Page 205

Chapter 7.17 – The Pin Revisited

7.17.7 – Using Your Spiders

Most critical pin placement decisions involve Ants since they
are the most mobile and typically offer alternative pin
placements. Spiders, on the other hand, rarely offer options
regarding pin placement. That is why initial Spider placement
is so critical. This is very important when a Spider is used as
a pin replacement (Section 6.1.2).
From Chapter 7.11 – Using Your Spiders, in the game T!HVringersoll-DrRaven-2011-07-07-0031, we arrive at
Figure 7.17.13. This is the same as Figure 7.11.11 on page
144, showing White Spider #2 on the attack. The reason that
the White Spider attack is so potent is because White Beetle
#1 is released by a fill when the White Spider moves into
space A. If the White Beetle had been pinned by an Ant, the
Ant would just shift around and keep the Beetle pinned. But
with a Spider’s restricted movement that is not possible in this
case.
Let’s go back to an earlier point in the game and see how the
initial placement of Black Spider #1 led to this position.
Figure 7.17.14 shows the decision that Black must make
when bringing in Spider #1 for a pin replacement. The first
option is to place the Spider in space B with a plan to move
to space D to free Black Ant #1. The second option is to place
the Spider in space C with a plan to move to Space A to free
the Ant. Which is better? DrRaven chose the first option
eventually leading to the endgame situation shown in
Figure 7.17.13.

Play Hive® Like a Champion

Figure 7.17.13
33 wS2 wQ/
33

A
Q

B

L

L
Figure 7.17.14
14 bS1 ??
14

B
A

C
D

L

Page 206

by Randy Ingersoll
But even before that, the choice of pin position affected the
game. Compare Figure 7.17.15 and Figure 7.17.16. The first
is the actual position that occurred when Black Ant #1 moved
out of its pinning position. The second is the position that
could have been with the other initial Spider placement.

Chapter 7.17 – The Pin Revisited
Figure 7.17.15
22 bA1 wS1-

B

The key to evaluating the difference is space A. Notice that
space A is inside a pocket (Section 4.5) in Figure 7.17.15 but
NOT inside a pocket in Figure 7.17.16. White’s next move
brought Hopper #1 into space B. There is no practical way for
Black to keep this Hopper from jumping into space A.

A
22

L

In the actual game (Figure 7.17.15), the White Hopper
released both White Beetle #1 and White Ant #1, allowing
both bugs to move.
But in the what-if scenario, only the White Ant is released.
This critical difference also had an effect on the eventual
outcome.

Another example of a pin placement decision based on the
location of a friendly Spider is from the game U!HV-lucassusringersoll-2011-02-13-1932. White has just employed a ring
to force the freedom of the White Queen. She has just escaped
as shown in Figure 7.17.17. And now the question is, “Where
should Black Ant #3 place the pin?”

L
Figure 7.17.16
Alt 22 bA1 wS1-

B

The answer comes from the location of the Black Spider.
When the Black Spider attacks, it must end up in space B.
Thus the Black Ant must pin from space C. Otherwise, the
Black Ant will interfere with the attacking possibilities of the
Black Spider.
Because of its limited movement a Spider must be
positioned properly to make good pins. Position your
Spiders well and you will be positioned for more
victories!

A

22
L

L
Figure 7.17.17
23 wQ /bA3
24 bA3 ??
24

7.17.8 – Conclusion
Many considerations should go into the proper
placement of each bug and each pin. To become a
true Hive® Master, a player must learn how to make
good pin placement choices.

A
B
C

23

S

Page 207

Chapter 7.17 – The Pin Revisited

Page 208

Play Hive® Like a Champion

by Randy Ingersoll

Chapter 8 – Beginners’ Mistakes

Chapter 8 – Beginners’ Mistakes
There are a series of mistakes that most, if not all,
beginning Hive® players make. The goal of this chapter is
to help readers of this book avoid these costly errors and
to quickly learn to ‘Play Hive® Like a Champion.’

8.1 – Misusing Your Ants

Without a doubt, the Ants are the most powerful of all the
standard bugs and can be a key factor in winning a game
of Hive®. Unfortunately, they can also be misused in a
variety of ways, any of which can be costly when playing,
not just against a skilled opponent, but even against a
novice or BoardSpace’s Dumbot.
8.1.1 – Starting with an Ant

The first misuse of an Ant can occur on a player’s first
turn! It may seem that playing your most powerful bug
first is a good tactic. But NO, it is not a good idea to start
with an Ant. Even though the Ant is the most powerful of
the basic bugs, it can easily be rendered immobile by
application of the One Hive and Freedom to Move rules.
When an Ant is the first bug placed by either side, the
probability is virtually zero that the Ant will ever be
released to play any offensive or defensive role in the
game. Against a competent opponent, wasting such an
important bug so early in the game is usually a sure fire
path to a loss.
The first two figures show a game with BoardSpace’s
Dumbot playing White (U!HV-Dumbot-ringersoll-201101-23-1232). Dumbot opened the game by playing an Ant.
You will easily see the results. In Figure 8.1.1 Black has
just played Spider #2 as shown. Please note that this forms
a ring which in most cases is not a good idea (Section 8.3
– Making a Ring). But in this case, it proves to be a very
good offensive move. Why? Because both the White
Queen and White Ant #1 are hemmed in and cannot move.
If instead of an Ant, White had placed a Hopper, Beetle,
Ladybug, or Mosquito on the first move, that bug would
now be free to move. Moving out would not only clear a

Figure 8.1.1
24 bS2 wQ/
24

LM

Page 209

Chapter 8 – Beginners’ Mistakes
space next to the Queen, but could possibly be used
in attacking the Black Queen. But as it stands, Black
can form the ring with no negative consequences.

Play Hive® Like a Champion
Figure 8.1.2
30 bG2 bA1-

Figure 8.1.2 shows the game six moves later after
Black has threatened space A, first with Hopper #1
(defended by a pin by White Ant #2 (Chapter 6.1 –
The Pin)) and then with Hopper #2. White’s position
is hopeless. He cannot defend against both Hoppers.
Once a Hopper moves into space A the Black
Ladybug will easily move into space B and win.

30

B
A

Also interesting to note is that if White could switch
Ant #1 with Spider #2, there would be one
additional defender available and Black Hopper #2
could also be stopped. But as it is, the White Spider
is useless in defense and Black wins.

LM

Lesson Number 1 is: “Don’t start with an
Ant.”
8.1.2 – Allowing Your Ants to Be Pinned

The second mistake that beginners often make with
their Ants is to allow them to be pinned (Chapter 6.1
– The Pin). This is actually a broader application of
the previous topic, ‘Starting with an Ant.’ When a
player starts with an Ant, he is guaranteeing that this
first Ant will be quickly rendered immobile. In fact
bug placement on the player’s second move does
this immediately.

Figure 8.1.3
31 wA3 bA3-

Remembering that one of the three keys to victory is
Mobility (Section 5.1 – Strategy – Three Keys to
Victory), a novice quickly learns that it is vitally
important to keep one’s Ants mobile and available
for both defensive and offensive uses all around the
hive.
A good example of this is Figure 8.1.3 from a game
between two experienced players (HV-ringersollBlackMagic-2010-11-04-2151). This figure shows
White move #31. Note how all three of the Black
Ants and the Black Mosquito are helplessly pinned.
White Ants #2 and #3 are free to move and White is
preparing to move White Hopper #2 in position to

Page 210

31

LM

by Randy Ingersoll

Chapter 8 – Beginners’ Mistakes

replace the White Mosquito currently pinning Black Ant #1.
After a successful execution of a Pin Replacement (Section
6.1.2), the White Mosquito will also be free to move.

With four bugs in reserve (one Hopper, two Beetles, and the
Ladybug) and all four of the most mobile Black bugs out of
play, it is just a matter of time before White forces a win. With
the close proximity of the two Queens (Section 7.7.2 –
Playing for a Draw – Compact Queens), White was forced to
play carefully and finally won on turn 93.
The second lesson: “A pinned Ant is a worthless Ant.”
8.1.3 – Using Your Ants to Pin Spiders

Because of the Ant’s superior mobility, it is a powerful
defensive weapon when properly used to pin the opponent’s
attacking bugs (Chapter 6.1 – The Pin). Pinning an opposing
Ant is usually a good trade off because your Ant is still
mobile, but the opponent’s Ant is not. This trade results in a
net gain in available bug strength. On the other hand, using an
Ant to pin an opposing Spider is very rarely a good idea.
When a Spider is positioned correctly and making a powerful
threat, a player may have no choice but to pin it with an
available Ant. As long as the Spider’s threat remains viable,
the pinning Ant is forced to stay put and the player has lost an
important bug.
Fortunately, because of the Spider’s limited movement, there
may not be a long term need to keep it pinned. As soon as the
Spider is no longer a serious threat, the pinning Ant can be
used for more important functions elsewhere. Following are
three examples of situations where a Spider threat forces a pin
by an Ant. One should pay particular attention to the moves
leading up to the Spider threat and subsequent Ant pin.
By recognizing these situations, an experienced Hive® player
will avoid them and avoid being forced into positions where
an Ant is wasted in this manner.
The first is Figure 8.1.4 from U!HV-ringersoll-Eucalyx2010-08-15-2102. Black has just played Spider #1 and is
threatening to pin White Ant #1 by moving to space A. If the
White Ant moves away, then the Black Spider will pin White
Ant #2 by moving to space B. In either case, White loses an
Ant. White has no choice but to pin the Black Spider. In the
actual game, White moved Ant #1 to space C.

Figure 8.1.4
10 bS1 bG1\

10

B
A

C

S
Figure 8.1.5
12 bS1 bG1\

B

A

12

L

Page 211

Chapter 8 – Beginners’ Mistakes
From the game U!HV-ringersoll-Eucalyx-2010-10-23-2212,
we get our second example in Figure 8.1.5 (page 211). Black
has again just placed Spider #1 and has a dual threat. If White
Ant #2 does not move, it will get pinned by the Black Spider
going to space A. If the White Ant does move, then the Black
Spider moves into space B and attacks the White Queen. This
virtually forces White to waste a valuable Ant pinning Black
Spider #1.
Finally, from the game U!HV-ringersoll-Eucalyx-201101-29-2201, comes our third example in Figure 8.1.6. On
turn 34, Black places Spider #2 as shown, with the immediate
threat of attacking the White Queen by moving to space A.
White counters by pinning the Black Spider from space B
with White Ant #2.

As mentioned above, if the Spider threat goes away, then the
need for the pin may also go away. Figure 8.1.7
demonstrates this. A few turns later, Black brings Ant #2
around and attacks the White Queen. Now notice that Black
Spider #2 is no longer in position to attack the White Queen.
The need for the pin no longer exists and White Ant #2 is free
to be used elsewhere.

Play Hive® Like a Champion
Figure 8.1.6
34 bS2 -bS1
35 wA2 -bS2

35

B
34

A

L
Figure 8.1.7
38 bA2 /wQ

The lesson: “Don’t waste an Ant pinning a Spider
unless you absolutely must.”
8.1.4 – Failing to Get Your Ants into Play Quickly
Enough

An Ant in reserve can be very powerful. Two or three in
reserve can be an almost unstoppable force. But a game lost
with Ants still in reserve exemplifies an inefficient use of bug
power. Allowing your opponent to bring his Ants into play
while keeping yours in reserve could easily allow your
opponent free rein over the entire hive. When you finally do
bring your Ants into play, your opponent may be able to pin
them and render them immediately useless.

In addition, not having enough Ants in play is a severe
shortcoming while on the defensive. Being the most mobile
bugs, Ants are particularly useful in rapid response to an
opponent’s immediate threats. But if your Ants are not in play,
you could easily find yourself one tempo behind and in a lost
game.

Page 212

38

L

by Randy Ingersoll
Figure 8.1.8 shows a position from a beginner’s game (HVcheewee-ringersoll-2011-02-17-0134) that exemplifies
this defensive shortcoming. Let’s analyze the situation. The
only White Ant in play is already pinned. Black has an
effective count of three Ants: the two Ants in play and the
Mosquito in position to move as an Ant. Finally, with the
positioning of White Spider #2 freeing her to move, the Black
Ladybug is in excellent position to attack. All in all, White
should be looking to defend, but instead, brings in another
Beetle in an attacking position.

Follow the campaign as Black first attacks with the Mosquito
on turn 18 (Figure 8.1.9) and then Ant #2 (Figure 8.1.10).
Even though White Ant #2 was brought into the game in the
meantime, White is helpless! Both Black Ant #1 and
the Black Ladybug threaten to deliver the fatal move into
space A. White Ant #2 can stop one or the other of the two
threats, but not both.
An instructional side note here regarding the use of the
Mosquito. Note that Black moved in first with the Mosquito
and then the Ant. The reason for this is that attacking with the
Ant first would remove the Mosquito’s ability to move like an
Ant, since it would no longer be adjacent to an Ant.
The lesson: “Get your Ants in play early.”

Chapter 8 – Beginners’ Mistakes
Figure 8.1.8
17 wB2 \wS1

17

LM
Figure 8.1.9
18 bM1 wQ/
19 wA2 wB2-

19

A
18

LM
Figure 8.1.10
20 bA2 bS1/

20

A

LM

Page 213

Chapter 8 – Beginners’ Mistakes

8.2 – Allowing the Queen to Escape

After carefully maneuvering bugs into position to surround
the opposing Queen, it is very important to watch for
opportunities for the opposing Queen to escape. Quite often
when an opposing Queen escapes, the bugs she leaves behind
are pinned and useless for future attacks.

Play Hive® Like a Champion

Figure 8.2.1
29 wG2 wS1\

A good example of this is shown in a game in which White is
a beginner (U!HV-guest-ringersoll-2011-01-28-2333).

As you can see in Figure 8.2.1, White has an Ant free, a
Beetle atop the hive, and a Hopper in reserve. This adds up to
a very strong White attack in the making. Even with a Beetle
and a Hopper nearby for defense, Black must defend very
carefully.
But here, White makes a critical, beginner mistake. Instead of
moving Hopper #2 to space B, filling one more space and
blocking the Black Queen, White moves the Hopper to
space A!? This move frees the Black Queen to escape!

Figure 8.2.2 shows the position after the Black Queen
escapes. Now, White has no chance to win. Notice how a
string of six White bugs are all pinned, starting with the White
Queen and ending with Ant #2 under White Beetle #1.
A quick bug count (Chapter 7.1 – Counting Bugs) reveals that
White has only four bugs available for attack, far short of the
six needed to win. In the actual game, Black immediately
went on the attack and won easily in ten more moves.

G

A

B

A

29

S
Figure 8.2.2
30 bQ wB1/

G

30

A

S

Page 214

by Randy Ingersoll
We draw our second example from the game HVHoborgHUN-ringersoll-2010-08-25-2259, in which White
allows the Black Queen to escape not once, but twice.
Figure 8.2.3 shows the first escape, as White Hopper #2
jumps in adjacent to the Black Queen, but in so doing, allows
the escape. White should bring one of the three bugs in from
the reserve (Ant, Spider, or Hopper) and maneuver it into
position to pin the Black Queen. Then, after the Queen has
been immobilized, the White Hopper can safely jump into
position.

Figure 8.2.4 shows the game’s 39th turn in which another ill
advised Hopper move allows the Black Queen to escape a
second time.

Chapter 8 – Beginners’ Mistakes
Figure 8.2.3
21 wG2 wB1\
22 bQ wG121

22

S
Figure 8.2.4
39 wG1 wS2\
SS

39

This mistake not only allowed the Queen to escape, but led to
the shutout position in Figure 8.2.5 (Chapter 7.5 – The
Shutout). Based on White’s position in this game, the second
Black Queen escape did not accomplish anything but a
quicker resolution to an already lost game. But even in
positions such as these, a good player is careful to not allow
the opposing Queen to escape.

S
Figure 8.2.5
40 bQ \wG2
S

40

Don’t snatch defeat from the jaws of victory by
allowing your opponent’s Queen to escape.

S

Page 215

Chapter 8 – Beginners’ Mistakes

8.3 – Making a Ring

“Rings are bad.” This is a basic principle that all beginning
Hive® players must follow. Making a ring will quite often
allow your opponent to choose where the ring will be broken
and which bugs will be released. In most cases, this will leave
the ring maker in an inferior position. Only if you control all
the bugs in a ring is it safe, and even then the ring may not be
all that helpful to you.
We will look at two positions from the same game between
the author and a beginner (U!HV-Fishboy-ringersoll-201012-16-0027). Looking at Figure 8.3.1, it is easy to see that
even though the game is still in its early stages, White is
already in trouble. All three of White’s Ants are immobile.
This is never a good sign. White now compounds the situation
by forming a ring by moving Spider #1 to space A.

Play Hive® Like a Champion

Figure 8.3.1
17 wS1 bA1-

A

LM
Figure 8.3.2
18 bQ wS118

Black can now break the ring by moving Black Ant #1,
the Black Queen, or the Black Ladybug. As shown in
Figure 8.3.2, Black elects to escape with the Black Queen
(Section 8.2 – Allowing the Queen to Escape). Not only has
the Black Queen escaped, but in so doing, she has pinned
another White bug (Chapter 6.1 – The Pin).

A few moves later, White makes another mistake that is even
more damaging than the first one! In Figure 8.3.3 White
moves the Ladybug into space A, forming another ring.
Again, Black can choose between any of three bugs to break
the ring. The Black Queen could escape again, or either the
Black Ladybug or Black Mosquito could move out.

17

LM
Figure 8.3.3
21 wL1 bM1/
22 bL1 wQ\

A

21

22

LM

Page 216

by Randy Ingersoll
In the actual game, Black elected to attack with the Ladybug
by 22 bL1 wQ\, but on post-mortem analysis, better is to
move the Mosquito (using the Ladybug’s movement ability)
as shown in Figure 8.3.4. This leaves the Mosquito in
excellent position, now being free to move as either a
Ladybug or an Ant. Black Ant #2 continues to be free to move
and when Black Ant #2 moves, the Black Ladybug will also
be free. The position of the Black Mosquito also severely
restricts White’s placement of new bugs (Chapter 7.3 –
Controlling Bug Placement).

Another example of a bad ring leading to a Queen escape and
a lost position is Figure 8.3.5 from the game HV-Dragonflyringersoll-2010-10-20-0000. White places Hopper #1 as
shown, allowing the Black Queen to escape; first to space A
then later to space B. If the Black Queen is allowed to move
all the way to space B, she will replace the pin (Section 6.1.2
– Replacing a Pin) on White Ant #3 and allow Black Ant #3
to move on to more important duties. Notice the long string of
seven White bugs, all pinned in place and unable to move.
This poor situation was brought about, at least in part, by an
ill conceived ring.

Chapter 8 – Beginners’ Mistakes
Figure 8.3.4
Alt 22 bM1 wL-

22

LM
Figure 8.3.5
19 wG1 wA1\
20 bQ wA3/

20

A

The game is hopelessly lost, highlighting the adage,
“Rings are bad.”

19

B

S

8.4 – Wasting Tempo in the Opening

The difference between winning and losing is often only one
tempo. Place and move your bugs carefully in the opening.
Moving a bug twice can be a loss of tempo. As White, this can
give the initiative to Black. As Black, it can result in a quick
defeat.

Figure 8.4.1 and Figure 8.4.2 (page 218) illustrate a lost
tempo early in a game between a beginner playing White and
the author playing Black (U!HV-toh-ringersoll-2011-02-210339). Black Spider #1’s threat to pin White Ant #1 forces the
White Ant to move. Attacking early as White is typically a
good idea, but one should take notice of the placement of the
White Ant on turn 7 as illustrated in the first figure.

Figure 8.4.1
7 wA1 \bQ
8 bG2 bQ\

7

8

S

Page 217

Chapter 8 – Beginners’ Mistakes
Not foreseeing the placement of Black Hopper #2 on turn 8
and not wanting to allow the newly placed Hopper to pin
Ant #1, White wastes a valuable tempo by moving Ant #1
again, as shown in Figure 8.4.2. This lost tempo shifts the
momentum to Black and is instrumental in the resultant loss
for White.

Another excellent example of wasting tempo in the opening is
shown in Figure 8.4.3 through Figure 8.4.6 from the game
HV-lukiejro-ringersoll-2010-07-29-2043. In this game, White
places Ant #1 early in the game and then promptly moves it
three times as shown in the first three figures. This waste of
tempo allows Black to bring too many attackers into the game
and soon White is overwhelmed.

Play Hive® Like a Champion
Figure 8.4.2
9 wA1 bQ/

9

S
Figure 8.4.3
9 wA1 bQ/
9

White’s attack with Ant #1 in Figure 8.4.3 is in line with an
attacking White strategy and is acutally an acceptable move,
unfortunately, it is followed by a series of poor ones!
Instead of continuing the attack, White, in Figure 8.4.4,
switches to the defensive by pinning the newly placed Black
Hopper.

S
Figure 8.4.4
10 bG2 bS1\
11 wA1 bG2\

11
10

When the first Black Ant is brought into the game as shown
in Figure 8.4.5, White decides that pinning the Ant is more
important than pinning the Hopper. And moving the White
Ant again, shifts the pin from one Black bug to the other.

S
Figure 8.4.5
12 bA1 -bS1
13 wA1 -bA1
12

13

S

Page 218

by Randy Ingersoll
And finally, Figure 8.4.6 shows the position as Black brings
in Ant #3. The only way White can stop this newly placed Ant
from winning the game is to release Black Beetle #1. In two
moves, this Beetle climbs up and over Black Hopper #3 and
the game is over.

Chapter 8 – Beginners’ Mistakes
Figure 8.4.6
28 bA3 /bB2

The lesson learned is: “Don’t waste valuable tempo
moving and removing an already placed bug.”

8.5 – Failing to Defend Your Queen

When friendly pieces adjacent to your Queen can move away,
you are one step farther away from losing. This may also have
the benefit of providing an escape route for your Queen.
However, as soon as your Queen no longer has any friendly
pieces next to her, she will be easier to surround and defeat.

28

S
Figure 8.5.1
10 bA2 -wG2

The best defenders are those bugs that cannot be hemmed in,
i.e., Beetle, Hopper, Ladybug, and Mosquito (if adjacent to
one of the previous bugs). Ants and Spiders make poor
defenders because they can be too easily pinned (Chapter 6.1
– The Pin) or blocked (Chapter 6.3 – The Block).
Let’s look at U!HV-ringersoll-lucassus-2011-02-13-2044.
Figure 8.5.1 shows the opening position after each player has
played four bugs. Each Queen is free to move and is
adjacent to two friendly bugs. There is a huge difference
however in that the two Black bugs are a Spider and an Ant,
whereas the two White bugs are both Hoppers. Even though
all four bugs are currently immobile, we shall soon see the
difference.

Figure 8.5.2 shows the position some moves later. White’s
attack has been relentless. The Black Queen is now
surrounded and unable to escape. The two Black bugs have
not moved and, in fact, cannot move. This means that White
only needs four bugs to win! With White Hopper #3 poised to
occupy either open space adjacent to the Black Queen and the
newly placed Ant #3 now in the battle, Black has no chance.

10

S
Figure 8.5.2
25 wA3 /wG1

A

B
25

S

Page 219

Chapter 8 – Beginners’ Mistakes
One more example again highlights the importance of
keeping defenders adjacent to your Queen. Figure 8.5.3
shows Turn 24 in the game HV-ringersoll-Dragonfly-201010-21-0108. Beetle #1 and Hopper #3 are in position to
execute the winning moves for White. Black Ant #2 cannot
come to the defense because it is currently tied down keeping
White Hopper #2 from jumping into an attacking position.
Black desperately tries to get another bug into the fight by
moving Black Beetle #1 as shown.
This highlights the importance of choosing defenders
carefully! If Black Spider #1 were replaced with a
Hopper, Beetle, or Ladybug, this Beetle move would free the
defending bug to move out. But since a Spider is limited by
the Freedom to Move rule, Black Spider #1 is trapped and
cannot escape. White won easily.
Another valuable lesson: “Keep defenders near your
Queen.”

8.6 – Allowing a Shutout

Due to the application of the One Hive and Freedom to Move
rules, it is natural that as the game progresses many bugs lose
their ability to move. Not fully understanding the
consequences of upcoming moves, many beginners find
themselves in a position where no moves at all are available.
Unlike the game of chess where such a position results in a
stalemate or draw, a player unable to move in Hive® must pass
instead. This situation, referred to as a Shutout (Chapter 7.5),
results in one’s opponent having a series of uninterrupted and
unhindered moves. Except in very rare circumstances, this
quickly results in defeat for the player who has been shutout.
Figure 8.6.1 and Figure 8.6.2 show the continuation of a
game used in an earlier section (U!HV-toh-ringersoll-201102-21-0339). Not recognizing the mistake, White jumps
Hopper #1 into position adjacent to the Black Queen, but in
doing so, not only allows the Black Queen to escape (Section
8.2 – Allowing the Queen to Escape), but also ends up in a
shutout position. Notice how all of the White bugs are
rendered immobile! With one Hopper in reserve and both
Beetles atop the hive, Black can, and did, quickly and
efficiently end the game.

Play Hive® Like a Champion
Figure 8.5.3
24 bB1 -bS2

24

A

LM
Figure 8.6.1
45 wG1 wG3\

A

45

G

S
Figure 8.6.2
46 bQ -wA1

46

A

G

S

Page 220

by Randy Ingersoll
The following game demonstrates another example, but this
time a shutout results from Black wasting too many tempi in
the opening. By repeatedly moving the Queen, Black falls far
behind in the development of bugs into the hive and sets
himself up for a shutout by White. This comes from the game
HV-ringersoll-PansORama-2010-10-24-2145.

Figure 8.6.3 shows turns 8 and 9. The Black Queen moves as
shown and White Spider #1 pins Black Spider #1. When you
examine the full move record you will see that this is actually
the Black Queen’s third move! This is, without a doubt, a
severe waste of valuable tempi.

With no available space to place a new bug, the Black Queen
is forced to move again as depicted in Figure 8.6.4. White
follows by bringing Ant #1 from the reserve.

Chapter 8 – Beginners’ Mistakes
Figure 8.6.3
8 bQ
wG1/
9 wS1 bS18

9

LM
Figure 8.6.4
10 bQ wS211 wA1 \wS2

11

And finally, in Figure 8.6.5, Black makes still another Queen
move, followed by White Ant #1 pinning the Black Queen.

This leads to the position in Figure 8.6.6 in which Black is
now shutout. There are plenty of Black bugs in reserve, but no
legal place to place any of them. White now proceeds to bring
in more bugs and quickly ends the game.
This game shows how one beginners’ mistake (wasting tempo
in the opening), resulted in a second beginners’ mistake
(allowing one self to be shutout), which led to a quick loss.

10

LM
Figure 8.6.5
12 bQ wS2/
13 wA1 bQ/

A very important lesson to learn: “Watch for and
avoid the shutout.”

8.7 – Conclusion
Learn from these Beginners’ Mistakes. Avoid them
whenever possible. And soon, you will be playing
Hive® like a champion!

13

12

LM
Figure 8.6.6
position after
13 wA1 bQ/

LM

Page 221

Chapter 8 – Beginners’ Mistakes

Page 222

Play Hive® Like a Champion

by Randy Ingersoll

Chapter 9 – Opening Theory

Chapter 9 – Opening Theory
A thorough, in-depth discussion of Hive® opening theory is
beyond the scope of this book, but a brief discussion of some
of the more common openings will be presented.

9.1 – Basic Concepts

To begin, let’s identify two basic opening formations, each of
which is pictured in Figure 9.1.1. Notice the relationship
between the White Queen and the first two bugs placed,
White Hopper #1 and Black Spider #1. These three bugs form
an elbow (Section 4.4 – Elbow) and thus this placement will
be referred to as an Elbow Queen Placement. Notice,
however, that the Black Queen, the Black Spider, and the
White Hopper are placed, not in an elbow, but in a straight
line. This placement will be referred to as an Inline Queen
Placement.

This allows an easy classification of openings into three
different groups. The first two groups are similar in that each
Queen is initially placed adjacent to the player’s opening bug.
Looking at Figure 9.1.2, the White Queen will be placed in
one of the three spaces labeled A and the Black Queen will be
placed in one of the spaces labeled B.

Figure 9.1.1

Inline Queen Placement
Figure 9.1.2
A

B

A

B
A

The third group differs in that at least one of the two Queens
is not initially placed adjacent to the player’s opening bug.
Again looking at Figure 9.1.2, either the White Queen is
not placed in one of the three spaces labeled A or the Black
Queen is not placed in one of the three spaces labeled B. Or,
possibly, both Queens are placed outside these respective
areas.

Figure 9.1.3
The C Opening

Figure 9.1.3 through Figure 9.1.7 illustrate the five openings
in the first two groups.

Figure 9.1.5
The I Opening

The first group, in which both Queens are placed in an elbow
placement, will be referred to as Elbow Openings, with two
subgroups: C Openings and Z Openings. The second group,
in which at least one Queen is placed in an inline placement,
will be referred to as Inline Openings and has three
subgroups: I openings, J openings, and F openings. And
finally all openings in the third group will collectively be
referred to as X openings.

Elbow Queen Placement

B

Figure 9.1.4
The Z Opening

Page 223

Chapter 9 – Opening Theory
To begin our discussion, please examine Figure 9.1.8. Notice
how both players have brought in an Ant and used it to pin the
opposing Queen. Space A in this figure highlights the primary
difference between the two initial Queen placements. With an
elbow placement, there is a space that is ‘inside the elbow.’
When a bug is moved into this space, the defending bug, in
this case White Hopper #1, is free to move. This is not the
case with the inline placement. White is free to place bugs in
any of the four empty spaces adjacent to the Black Queen
without fear that the Black Spider defending the Queen will
be freed. Understanding this difference is critical to proper
opening evaluation.

It is interesting to note that the player placing the Queen last
has the choice of which opening to play. In most cases this
will be Black. The player placing the Queen first narrows the
list to two or three different openings, but the ultimate choice
belongs to the player placing the Queen last.

Play Hive® Like a Champion
Figure 9.1.6
The J Opening

Figure 9.1.7
The F Opening

Figure 9.1.8

A

9.2 – Elbow Openings
9.2.1 – C Opening

When both players play their Queens in an elbow placement
and both Queens are on the same side of the center line, we
have the C Opening. Many feel that this opening raises the
probability of the ultimate outcome being a draw due to the
close proximity of the two Queens. If one is playing Black
against a superior opponent and one considers a draw to be an
acceptable outcome, then this opening may be a good choice.

The C Opening games typically revolve around control of two
spaces. (Please see Figure 9.2.1.) The two labeled spaces are
the critical spaces. White has the upper hand if he can occupy
space B before Black occupies space A. On the other hand, if
Black occupies space A before White can occupy space B,
then Black’s game improves immensely.
The value of these two spaces involves the making of a ring
(Chapter 7.6 – Making a Ring). When the second player plays
into his critical space, after the first player has already
successfully occupied his critical space, then a ring is formed.
In many cases, this will free either the opposing Queen or a
bug defending the Queen.
Victory in C Opening games hinges not just on the occupation
of the two critical spaces but also on the pins or covers on the
defending bugs freed by the inevitable ring making.
Page 224

Figure 9.2.1
C Opening – Critical Spaces
A

B

by Randy Ingersoll
A sample opening from the game U!HV-BlackMagicringersoll-2010-12-01-0040 is shown in Figure 9.2.2. White
and Black have each brought in an Ant and pinned the
corresponding Queen. White has taken the critical spot and in
the end pulled out the victory.

Chapter 9 – Opening Theory
Figure 9.2.2
8 bA1 \wQ

8

9.2.2 – Z Opening

When the Queens are on opposite sides of the center line, we
have a Z Opening. In games between two players of equal
strength, this quite often leads to a wide open game with
White attacking early. If able to withstand this opening
assault, Black has excellent counter attacking chances. Quite
often victory hinges around the effectiveness of Black’s
Queen defense and the ability of White to pin and/or cover the
Black defenders.
Mobility is a key in the wide open games that Z Openings
regularly produce. These games quite often go to the side with
the most free Ants. Failure to get one’s Ants into proper
offense/defense positions can be the primary source of defeat
in Z Openings.

A very typical Z opening game (U!HV-diogocrist-ringersoll2010-12-02-0150) is shown in Figure 9.2.3. White is on the
attack and has already pinned the Black Queen. Black has two
good Hopper defenders in place and with turn 10 has pinned
White Ant #2 and set a Block on space A.

S

Figure 9.2.3
9 wA2 /wS1
10 bA1 wA2\

A

10

9

L

9.3 – Inline Openings
9.3.1 – I Opening

When both players elect to place their Queens inline, we have
the I Opening. With proper play on both sides, this opening
definitely favors White. As noted in the introduction to
this section, an inline Queen placement does not allow for
an efficient escape by the defenders of one’s Queen. This
defensive liability typically will negatively affect Black
against an aggressive White player.
On the other hand, if White fully utilizes the first move
advantage, White will not be negatively affected by the
inline Queen placement. If, however, White allows Black to
take the initiative and counter attack early, White’s inline
Queen placement may return to haunt him.

Page 225

Chapter 9 – Opening Theory
The game HV-ringersoll-humdeabril-2010-12-27-2254
(Figure 9.3.1) shows a typical I opening. White has a distinct
advantage at this point in the game. The Black Queen has
been pinned, three spaces around the Black Queen have been
occupied and Black is limited in new bug placement options.
Black is soon forced on the defensive and White won
relatively easily.

Play Hive® Like a Champion
Figure 9.3.1
10 bS2 \wQ
11 wA1 bQ/
10

11

9.3.2 – J Opening

The J Opening occurs when White chooses an inline
placement and Black chooses an elbow placement. This
opening, more often than not, comes from White’s desire to
get his Queen into play early (turn 2) and at the same time
keep Black from choosing either the C or Z Openings. With
proper play, White can overcome the inherent problems with
an inline placement.

M

One advantage to the J Opening is that White can start its
attack against the Black Queen with a Spider either above or
below the initial bugs.

A typical J Opening, from the game TU!HV-gideonbobEucalyx-2011-05-24-2005 is shown in Figure 9.3.2. White
has begun the attack on the Black Queen, but Black is
prepared to put up a good defense. In addition to the two well
placed Black defenders (the Ladybug and Hopper #1) there is
a Black Ant already placed and ready to respond to any White
threat. Eucalyx, a Hive® Master, defended well and then,
when the opportunity was presented, counter attacked and
won.

Figure 9.3.2
7 wS1 bQ/
8 bG1 bQ\
7

8

L

9.3.3 – F Opening

When White chooses an elbow placement and Black chooses
an inline placement we have the F Opening. With proper play,
this opening highly favors White. Black suffers from the
defensive problems inherent in an inline opening, but does
not have the counter attack chances that exist in the I Opening
discussed above.
The example for the F Opening is U!HV-ringersolllucassus-2011-02-13-2044, a game that was previously seen
in Section 8.5 – Beginners’ Mistakes – Failing to Defend Your
Queen. In Figure 9.3.3 we see a scenario that definitely
favors White. Black’s Queen is pinned and the two defenders
are a Spider and an Ant, neither of which are optimum
defending bugs. White, on the other hand, has two Hoppers
defending the White Queen. And once the White Ants begin
to enter the game, Black will be in serious trouble.
Page 226

Figure 9.3.3
13 wS2 bQ\
14 bS2 \wQ
14

13

S

by Randy Ingersoll

Chapter 9 – Opening Theory

9.4 – Other Openings
9.4.1 – X Openings

In all openings, the first bug played on both sides is
immediately self-pinned by the player’s second bug. There is
nothing that can be done about that, it is just part of the game.
However, if the Queen is not placed adjacent to the first bug,
there will be at least two bugs that are self pinned. If White
elects to do this, the result may be little more than a loss of
tempo and a balancing of White’s first move advantage.
If, however, Black elects to do this, the lost tempo could result
in a quick loss.
Due to the above, very little need be said regarding the
X Openings. It is critical to get one’s Queen into play early so
that friendly bugs can move quickly. Playing an X Opening is
not typically recommended.

HV-isagooss-ringersoll-2010-08-17-1928 demonstrates the
shortcomings inherent in an X Opening. Figure 9.4.1 shows
turn 7 when the White Queen is finally brought into the game.
In this position two of the three White bugs already in the
game are now pinned by the White Queen! Against an
experienced Black player this puts White in a very deep hole
right from the start. Ringersoll took advantage of this and won
easily in 36 moves.

There is one X Opening that may have some merit. It is called
the 3 Bug Defense. And should only be tried playing with
both Ladybug and Mosquito. In this defense, Black typically
plays Spider, Ladybug, Mosquito, and Queen in the pattern
shown in Figure 9.4.2 (from the game T!HV-Fumanchuringersoll-2011-07-03-1907). At the expense of one tempo,
Black has placed himself in position to benefit from two
defenders, is one step farther away from White’s initial bug,
and has more choices of new bug placement. In addition, if
White allows Black to occupy spaces A and B, then the Black
Ladybug and/or Black Mosquito can easily escape.

Figure 9.4.1
7 wQ -wG1

7

S
Figure 9.4.2
7 wG1 /wQ
8 bQ bL1/

7

8

A

B

LM

9.5 – Conclusion
Knowledge of these basic opening concepts, coupled
with a good understanding of Hive® tactics, will soon
lead to better midgame positions and more victories!

Page 227

Chapter 9 – Opening Theory

Page 228

Play Hive® Like a Champion

by Randy Ingersoll

Chapter 10.1 – Bug Movement atop the Hive

Chapter 10.1 – Bug Movement atop the Hive
Because the Freedom to Move rule applies atop the hive just
as it does at ground level, bugs can be blocked by a gate
formation atop the hive. This restriction applies to Beetles,
Mosquitoes acting as Beetles, and Ladybugs. The Freedom to
Move rule and gate formations do not affect Hoppers. During
movement, Hoppers are considered to be ‘flying above the
hive’ and therefore go over all bug formations in their path.
Adding this third dimension does create some interesting
situations that may or may not be obvious.

Basically, a gate formation affects movement whether it is at
basic hive level or atop the hive. Even though a Beetle can
climb atop another bug, it must still adhere to the Freedom to
Move rule. In Beetle movement atop the hive, there are
basically three cases.*

10.1.1 – Beetle Start Height and Beetle
End Height are Equal

Case A) If BOTH blocking spaces are equal to or higher than
the Beetle start height, then movement is NOT allowed.

Case B) If EITHER blocking space is lower than the Beetle
start height, then movement IS allowed.

Look at Figure 10.1.1 and Figure 10.1.2 (page 230). In the
first, the height of both Black Beetle #1 (the moving bug)
and the target space atop the White Queen are the same,
level 2. The two potential blocking spaces are occupied by
White Beetle #1 and White Beetle #2, both of which are also
at level 2. A gate is formed at level 2, Case A above applies,
and movement directly atop the White Queen is NOT
allowed. Black Beetle #1 could move atop the White Queen
in two moves. First, climbing atop either of the two blocking
bugs, and then, on a later turn, moving atop the White Queen.

Figure 10.1.1
Case A
bB1 wQ is NOT allowed

S

A

G

*Please note that the diagrams used to illustrate these principles are not from real
games and therefore may not portray situations that one would normally see.

Page 229

Chapter 10.1 – Bug Movement atop the Hive
Note the similarity with Figure 10.1.2 in which the White
Beetle, both blocking bugs, and the target space are all on
ground level. Again, in this case, as per Case A, movement is
NOT allowed.

In Figure 10.1.3, however, movement IS allowed because
Black Spider #1 is at level 1 (lower than White Beetle #2’s
starting height) and Case B applies.

10.1.2 – Beetle Start Height is Above
Beetle End Height

Case C) If BOTH blocking spaces are equal to or higher than
the Beetle start height, then movement is NOT allowed.

Case D) If EITHER blocking space is lower than the Beetle
start height, then movement IS allowed.

Case C is illustrated in Figure 10.1.4 which is very similar to
Figure 10.1.1 (page 229). In this instance, the starting height
of White Beetle #2 (level 2) is higher than its ending height
(level 1). The Beetle is climbing down, the Freedom to Move
rule applies, and the move is NOT allowed.

Figure 10.1.5 is similar to Figure 10.1.3. White Beetle #2 is
moving down. Its starting height is level 2 and its ending
height is level 1. One of the potential blocking spaces (the
one occupied by Black Spider #1) is lower than the Beetle’s
starting height and therefore, according to Case D, movement
IS allowed.

Play Hive® Like a Champion
Figure 10.1.2
Case A
wB2 bQ- is NOT allowed

Figure 10.1.3
Case B
wB2 bQ is allowed

B

Figure 10.1.4
Case C
wB2 bQ\ is NOT allowed

S

B

A

Figure 10.1.5
Case D
wB2 bQ\ is allowed

B

Page 230

A

A

by Randy Ingersoll

Chapter 10.1 – Bug Movement atop the Hive

10.1.3 – Beetle Start Height is Below
Beetle End Height

Case E) If BOTH blocking spaces are equal or higher than the
Beetle end height, then movement is NOT allowed.
Case F) If EITHER blocking space is lower then the Beetle
end height, then movement IS allowed.

Figure 10.1.6
Case E
bB2 wQ is NOT allowed

And finally, the next two figures illustrate the cases when a
Beetle is climbing up, when its starting height is below its
ending height. In Figure 10.1.6 Black Beetle #2 is starting at
ground level (level 1) and attempting to climb atop the White
Queen (to level 2). The two blocking bugs are also at level 2,
Case E is in affect, and movement is NOT allowed.
In Figure 10.1.7, one of the blocking bugs is at level 1, which
is lower than the Beetle’s end height. Thus, Case F is applied
and movement IS allowed.

S

B

Figure 10.1.7
Case F
bB2 wQ is allowed

10.1.4 – Ladybug Movement atop the
Hive

Due to the unique movement pattern of the Ladybug we will
not show examples of all the potential blocking situations.
One should suffice to show the basic principle involved.

Figure 10.1.8 illustrates the White Ladybug’s normal
movement possibilities. Her first move can be atop the White
Spider, the White Queen, or the White Hopper. Continuing
with her movement pattern, the White Ladybug can finish in
any of the spaces labeled A.

B

Figure 10.1.8
wL1 can move to any space labeled A
A
A

A

A

A

A
A

A
A

A

Page 231

Chapter 10.1 – Bug Movement atop the Hive
But add two bugs atop the hive (in this case two Black
Beetles) and the White Ladybug’s movement is now
restricted. The two Beetles in Figure 10.1.9 form a gate
preventing the Ladybug from crawling immediately atop the
White Queen. She can still climb atop the White Queen, but
her first move must be atop one of the two Black Beetles.
Then on her second move, she can climb atop the White
Queen.
Due to the restrictions of the gate, she can no longer reach any
of the spaces labeled B.

Play Hive® Like a Champion
Figure 10.1.9
wL1 can move to any space labeled A,
but NOT spaces labeled B
B
A

A

A

Even though the Pillbug itself does not move across the top of
the hive like the Ladybug does, the existence of a gate may
restrict the Pillbug’s use of its special power. The Pillbug in
Figure 10.1.10 the Pillbug may pick up the White Queen and
move her to space A, but due to the two nearby Beetle stacks,
the White Queen cannot be moved to space B.

A

B

S

10.1.6 – Conclusion
Although these situations are rarely encountered
in a game of Hive®, understanding them is vital to
becoming a true master of the game.

Page 232

B

Figure 10.1.10
wP1 can move wQ to space A,
but NOT to space B

A

B
A

B

G

B

10.1.5 – Pillbug Movement atop the
Hive

B

A

by Randy Ingersoll

Chapter 10.2 – Additional Bugs

Chapter 10.2 – Additional Bugs
Many new bugs have been proposed by Hive® players around
the world. A few have been chosen to be included in this
book. To qualify for inclusion, the new bug must adhere to the
One Hive rule and the Constant Contact rule, both of which
are fundamental rules of Hive®. Some adjustment to the
placement rule is allowed when necessary and the Freedom to
Move rule may be ignored when a new bug’s movement or
special abilities allow it.

10.2.1 – Mosquito Interaction

Interaction with the Mosquito is problematic in two basic
regards. First, should the Mosquito take on the special
abilities of an expansion bug or should it just take on the
movement? And second, if an expansion bug has ‘top of hive’
movement, how does this affect the Mosquito?

With the introduction of the Pillbug in 2013, it seems that the
official answer for the first question is “Yes, the Mosquito
does inherit both movement and special power.” The designer
of each expansion bug may, however, rule differently on this
topic.
On the other hand, the subject of ‘top of hive’ movement is
much more complex. On the forums at BoardGameGeek.com
there does not seem to be a consensus among Hive® players
around the world and until John Yianni and the team at Gen42
Games post an official opinion, this question will not be
definitively answered.

The problem arises when one considers a Mosquito, using
another bug’s movement, climbing atop the hive. When the
game only has one bug with this ability (Beetle), the solution
is very simple. The Mosquito continues to move like a Beetle
as long as it is atop the hive. But, with the introduction of
other bugs with this ability, the situation becomes much more
complex. If a Mosquito uses another bug’s movement and
climbs up, how does it continue to move?
There seems to be a general agreement that rules should be as
simple as possible, must conform to all basic Hive® rules, and
must not require a ‘memory factor.’

Page 233

Chapter 10.2 – Additional Bugs
Bug designers have come up with three different solutions.

The first and simplest seems to be just add a rule that states
that the Mosquito can use an inherited bug’s movement as
long as the movement does not start at ground level and end
atop the hive. To illustrate, please look at Figure 10.2.1.

Play Hive® Like a Champion
Figure 10.2.1
Mosquito Interaction - Part 1

D

The Black Mosquito may use Spider movement to move to
either of the spaces labeled S, can use Dragonfly movement
to move to either of the spaces labeled D but cannot use
Dragonfly movement to move to the space labeled X.

The second solution introduces an entire new class of bugs
and modifies the placement rule. This group of bugs only
exist atop the hive. Their initial placement is atop a friendly
bug and their movement does not allow them to climb down.
This solves the problem. A Mosquito cannot use their
movement to climb up, but once up, the Mosquito can mimic
their movement. Figure 10.2.2 shows this, using the Moth as
an example.
The White Moth has just been placed as shown. These bugs
must be placed atop a friendly bug, which itself is not
adjacent to any opposing bug. Note that this is the only legal
placement location for the Moth because every other White
bug has a Black bug adjacent to it.
On a following move the White Moth may move across the
hive, ending its movement atop an opposing bug. (For more
details, see Section 10.2.8.) In this situation the White
Mosquito gains no movement from the Moth. Since the Moth
never exists on ground level and therefore does not have the
ability to climb atop the hive, there is no movement ability for
the Mosquito to mimic. If however, the Mosquito were
already atop the hive, it could mimic the Moth’s movement.
The third solution also introduces a new class of bugs, the
Mini-Bugs. These bugs are not full sized, but smaller. Due
to their small size, they too must always stay atop the hive.
One primary difference is that, due to the difference in size,
the Mosquito cannot inherit any movement from one of the
Mini-Bugs. Figure 10.2.3 illustrates this using the Mite.
As we see from this figure, Mini-Bugs are also placed atop
friendly bugs, in this case the White Queen. Even though
the adjacent Black Mosquito is free to move, it gains no
movement ability from the White Mite.

Experience has shown that when two players of equal ability
play, there is a small bias toward White. When the Mosquito
was introduced, this bias increased slightly. When the
Ladybug was introduced, however, this bias increased
Page 234

X

D

S

Figure 10.2.2
Mosquito Interaction - Part 2

G

S

Figure 10.2.3
Mosquito Interaction - Part 3

S

by Randy Ingersoll

Chapter 10.2 – Additional Bugs

dramatically. The concern that some players have is that
additional bugs will increase the Mosquito’s value and
therefore increase this bias even more. This bias toward
White is the primary reason why the Mosquito must be
considered in the design of all expansion bugs.

10.2.2 – Dragonfly - D*

The Dragonfly moves in a special pattern
reminiscent of the Knight in chess. But in
addition to its unique movement, it has the
ability to pick up and carry other bugs, both
friendly and opposing.

Figure 10.2.4
Dragonfly Movement

Movement – The Dragonfly moves exactly two spaces. The
first space may be in any direction, but it must be atop another
bug. The second space will then be either forward-right or
forward-left. As with other bugs, the One Hive and the
Constant Contact rules must be obeyed. But, like a Beetle, it
may land atop the hive. (See Figure 10.2.4 where the White
Dragonfly is atop the hive.)

Q

A
B

Placement – Placement of the Dragonfly must obey all
standard placement rules.

Special Rules – When atop another piece, the Dragonfly may
pick up the piece immediately below it and transport it to the
Dragonfly’s destination space. To use this special transporting
ability, the Dragonfly’s destination space must be empty and
the piece below it must be free to move. To clarify, if a
Dragonfly starts its move atop another piece, that piece is free
to move without violating the One Hive rule, and the
Dragonfly’s destination space is empty, then the Dragonfly
may transport the piece with it.

In Figure 10.2.4 the Black Dragonfly may move to space A
or atop the Black Queen. The White Dragonfly may move to
any of six spaces. These are space A, space B, atop the Black
Queen, atop White Ant #2, atop Black Hopper #2, or atop
White Hopper #2. If moving to space A or space B the White
Queen may be transported. If moving to any of the other four
spaces the White Queen may not be transported.
Interaction with Mosquito – When playing with both the
Mosquito and Dragonfly, the Mosquito may acquire the
movement of the Dragonfly, as long as the Mosquito does not
use the Dragonfly’s movement to climb atop the Hive. When

Figure 10.2.5
Mosquito/Dragonfly Interaction
X

X

X

A
X

X
Q
X

*concept, design, and art by Christian Sperling a.k.a. Eucalyx at BoardSpace

Page 235

Chapter 10.2 – Additional Bugs
a Mosquito is atop the hive and adjacent to a Dragonfly
(either atop the hive or at ground level), it may choose to use
the Dragonfly’s movement and/or transport ability. Take a
look at Figure 10.2.5 on page 235. The White Mosquito,
using Dragonfly movement may move to any of the six
spaces marked X. If the destination space is vacant, the White
Mosquito may transport the Black Ant below it.

Notation – When a Dragonfly transports another bug, the
identity of the Dragonfly and the bug being carried are
separated by a ‘+’ followed by standard notation of the
destination space. (See Figure 10.2.6.)
Strengths – The Dragonfly, if properly used, can be an
extremely strong bug. Offensively, it can fly into an otherwise
inaccessible space, or alternatively drop another bug into that
space. Defensively, it can rescue a partially surrounded Queen
or remove a piece adjacent to and threatening the friendly
Queen.

Play Hive® Like a Champion
Figure 10.2.6
Dragonfly Movement – Notation
wD1+bB1 /wA1

A

B

Weaknesses – Extreme care must be given when initially
placing a Dragonfly. Due to its unique movement pattern, it
may only land on approximately 1/3 of the spaces in the hive.
If improperly placed, the Dragonfly may not be able to reach
its intended destination and fulfill its mission.

10.2.3 – Scorpion - Sc*

The Scorpion derives its uniqueness, not from
any special movement but from its ability to
sting and paralyze other bugs. The Scorpion can
be used as both an offensive or defensive
weapon in the hands of a Hive® Master.

Movement – The Scorpion moves in a standard manner and
must move exactly two spaces. As with other bugs using
standard movement, it must conform with the Freedom to
Move and One Hive rules. In Figure 10.2.7 the White
Scorpion can move to either of the two labeled spaces.
Placement – Placement of the Scorpion must obey all
standard placement rules.

Special Rules – At the conclusion of its move, the Scorpion
has the special ability to sting and paralyze one adjacent bug,
friendly or opposing. The Scorpion must move in order
to sting another bug. If the Scorpion is adjacent to a stack
* initial idea proposed by Gordon Watson, expanded by Jason Wallace a.k.a.
DrRaven at BoardSpace, and completed by Jaroslaw Szczepanik a.k.a. Svartisen
at BoardSpace.

Page 236

Figure 10.2.7
Scorpion Movement – Part 1

A

B

by Randy Ingersoll
of bugs, it stings the topmost, visible bug in the stack.
In Figure 10.2.8 the White Scorpion has just moved. It may
choose to sting White Hopper #2, Black Spider #1, or the
Black Queen.

Chapter 10.2 – Additional Bugs
Figure 10.2.8
Scorpion Movement – Part 2
wSc1 wG2\ xbS1

The bug that is stung is flipped over and cannot move until a
turn is spent to clear the paralysis. Paralyzed bugs that
are adjacent to an uncovered, unparalyzed, opposing Scorpion
may not have their paralysis cleared. Figure 10.2.9 shows
after the White Scorpion has moved and stung Black
Spider #1.
Bugs with ‘top of hive’ movement may not pass or end their
movement atop a paralyzed bug. In Figure 10.2.10, Black
Beetle #1 may not approach the White Queen because the
Black Spider has been paralyzed.

Figure 10.2.9
The Scorpion’s Sting

The Scorpion may not sting another Scorpion.

Interaction with Mosquito – The Mosquito inherits the two
space movement of the Scorpion but does not inherit the
Scorpion’s stinging ability. In Figure 10.2.11 the White
Mosquito may move to any of the four labeled spaces. Using
the movement of the adjacent Black Queen, it may move to
the two spaces labeled Q. Using the movement of the adjacent
White Scorpion, it may move to the two spaces labeled Sc.
Notation – In addition to the Scorpion’s normal movement
notation, we must note when a bug has been stung. This is
done by following the standard movement notation with an
‘x’ and the identity of the bug stung. (See Figure 10.2.8.)

The release of a paralyzed bug is notated by the identity of the
bug followed by the notation ‘REL.’

Strengths – The ability to immobilize another bug is a very
powerful weapon. On defense, a Scorpion can immobilize an
attacking enemy bug or block the approach of an attacking
Beetle. On the attack, a bug defending the opposing Queen
can be rendered immobile and useless for defense. And in
addition, the tempo spent releasing an immobile bug can be a
game changer.
Weaknesses – The slow movement of the Scorpion and
the danger of being pinned or blocked are this bug’s biggest
weakness.

S

Figure 10.2.10
Effects of a Stung Bug

S
G

Figure 10.2.11
The Scorpion and the Mosquito

Sc
Q

Q
Sc

Page 237

Chapter 10.2 – Additional Bugs

10.2.4 – Honeycomb - H

The Honeycomb is not a bug in the usual sense.
It is a special two-sided (White on one side,
Black on the other) piece that may be played by
either player and provides either Queen with the
possibility of escape from a bad situation.

Play Hive® Like a Champion

Figure 10.2.12
Honeycomb Placement
42 bH bS1/
42

Movement – Once placed, the Honeycomb may not move.

Placement – The player who places the Honeycomb does so
with his color showing. Placement must conform to all
standard placement rules as they apply to the placing player,
i.e., it must be in contact with a friendly bug of its own color
and must not be in contact with an opposing bug.
In Figure 10.2.12 Black places the Honeycomb on turn 42.
Note that the Honeycomb is placed black side up to indicate
that the Black player placed it in the hive.

Special Ability, Queen Escape – The Honeycomb has the
special ability to provide either Queen special movement in
the form of an escape. To qualify for this special movement,
the Queen must not be covered by any bug and must not
already be adjacent to the Honeycomb. In addition, removing
the Queen from its current location must not violate the One
Hive rule. It can, however, violate the Freedom to Move rule
as it applies to the Queen.
Figure 10.2.13 shows Black taking advantage of the special
Queen movement introduced by the Honeycomb. Notice how,
when White threatened to win by bringing in Hopper #3, the
Black Queen escaped from an otherwise surrounded position
to a space adjacent to the Honeycomb.

In the situation shown in these two figures, the White Queen
cannot use this special movement because doing so would
disconnect Black Hopper #1 from the remainder of the hive,
thus violating the One Hive rule.

Special Rule, Drawn Games – Once the Honeycomb is
played, the game can no longer end in a draw. Instead of a
draw, the player who played the Honeycomb (indicated by its
visible color) loses.

Interaction with Mosquito – Since the Honeycomb has no
movement ability, it does not interact with the Mosquito at all.
A Mosquito adjacent to no other piece other than the
Honeycomb will be immobile.
Movement Notation – No special notation is required for
both placement of the Honeycomb and movement of the
Queen to the Honeycomb.
Page 238

M

Figure 10.2.13
Honeycomb Special Ability, Queen Escape
43 wG3 wA144 bQ bH-

44

M

43

by Randy Ingersoll

Chapter 10.2 – Additional Bugs

Strengths – The strength of the Honeycomb is its ability to
rescue one’s Queen.

Weaknesses – When the Honeycomb is placed, three things
occur that may cause problems. First, since it is immobile, it
will more than likely permanently pin the friendly bug that it
was placed adjacent to. Second, it will open the possibility of
the opposing Queen being rescued. And third, to win all the
opponent must now do is play for a draw.

10.2.5 – Mantis - Ma

In real life, the Mantis is a voracious predator,
constantly looking for its next meal. Here, in our
hive, it captures another bug and flies off with it,
temporarily removing itself and the other bug
from the game.

Movement – The Mantis moves one, two, or three spaces in
a standard manner, except when using the special movement
ability mentioned below. It may not climb atop the hive and
while moving within the hive, it must conform with the One
Hive and Freedom to Move rules. In Figure 10.2.14 the Black
Mantis can move to any of the shaded spaces, except space A.
It is prohibited from moving to space A by the Freedom to
Move rule.

Figure 10.2.14
Mantis Movement

M

A

Placement – Mantis placement must obey all standard
placement rules.

Special Rules – The Mantis has the special ability to remove
itself and an adjacent bug (friendly or opposing) from the
hive. In order to do this the One Hive rule must not be
violated, but the Freedom to Move rule may be ignored as
it applies to both the Mantis and the bug being removed.
If adjacent to a stack of bugs, the Mantis removes only the
topmost, visible bug. In order to take advantage of this special
movement ability, the Mantis must remove another bug, it
may not leave the board by itself.
In Figure 10.2.15 (page 240) the Black Manits may remove
White Spider #1 but not White Hopper #3. White Hopper #3
is prohibited from moving by the One Hive rule and therefore
may not be removed by the Mantis.

The Mantis is immediately returned to the reserve and can be
reintroduced to the hive on a later turn. Friendly bugs are also
returned immediately to the reserve.

Page 239

Chapter 10.2 – Additional Bugs
Different rules, however, apply to opposing bugs removed in
this manner. If the opposing Queen is removed, she is
returned to the opponent’s reserve immediately. Any other
opposing bug is not returned to the opponent’s reserve until
the Mantis is reintroduced to the hive. When the Mantis is
played into the hive, the opposing bug is returned to the
reserve and can then once again be played into the hive.

In the opening moves of a game, a player may not move any
bugs until the Queen has been played into the hive. That same
rule applies here; if a player’s Queen is removed by a Mantis,
none of that player’s bugs may be moved until the Queen is
reintroduced to the hive. There is no limit as to the length of
time that a Queen may be withheld. But a player may not
pass. If a valid placement is available, a bug from the reserve
must be brought into the hive. If the Queen is the only bug
remaining in the player’s reserve, she must be played.
The rules for victory are not changed. A player wins by
surrounding the opposing Queen. A player cannot win unless
the opposing Queen is in the hive.

Interaction with Mosquito – The Mosquito inherits the
Mantis’ moving ability, both the standard movement and the
special movement. The only difference is that an opposing
bug removed by the Mosquito is immediately returned to the
opponent’s reserve.
Movement Notation – The removal of a Mantis from the
hive is notated by ‘REM.’ The Mantis and the bug removed
are both noted, separated by a ‘+’. (See Figure 10.2.15.)

Strengths – The Mantis can be used both offensively and
defensively. The Mantis can remove a dangerous attacking
bug and keep it out of play indefinitely. Or defensively, the
friendly Queen can be removed from a dangerous position
and brought back into play in a safer place. When tempo is
not critical, it can also be used to remove and reintroduce a
bug to a more beneficial spot.
Weaknesses – The only glaring weakness of the Mantis is the
possibility of being pinned or blocked.

Page 240

Play Hive® Like a Champion
Figure 10.2.15
Mantis Movement
bMa1+wS1 REM

M

by Randy Ingersoll

10.2.6 – Rhinoceros Beetle - R

The actual Rhinoceros Beetle is a very strong
and powerful bug. In our hive, this powerful
bug is a pushing bug, burrowing under adjacent
bugs (or a stack of adjacent bugs) pushing them
out of its way.

Movement – The Rhinoceros Beetle (commonly referred to
as the Rhino) moves one space in any direction, obeying all
standard movement rules except as noted below. Unlike its
Beetle cousin, it cannot move atop the hive. Using its normal
movement ability the Rhino in Figure 10.2.16 can move to
either space A or space B.

Chapter 10.2 – Additional Bugs

Figure 10.2.16
Standard Rhino Movement
A
B

A

Placement – The Rhino placement must obey all standard
placement rules.

Special Rules – The Rhino has the special ability to burrow
under an adjacent bug, or stack of bugs, and then push that
bug or stack of bugs to a vacant, adjacent space. A Rhino may
not end its turn under another bug. Each bug must be
displaced to an adjoining space. The bug or bugs displaced
may be placed in the space just vacated by the Rhino.

If it burrows under a stack of bugs, the bugs may be
moved as a stack to one space or each bug may be moved
independently to different spaces. Naturally, only bugs with
‘top of hive’ movement are allowed to end the turn atop other
bugs.

Figure 10.2.17
Special Rhino Movement – Part 1

A

A

S

Now let’s look at Figure 10.2.17. The One Hive rule applies
to the Rhino at all times, even when using its special
movement ability. However, the Freedom to Move rule does
not apply when burrowing under an adjacent bug. The Black
Rhino may burrow under the White Ladybug, even though
under normal movement conditions the Rhino could not fit
between the two stacks of bugs.
The movement of bugs displaced by the Rhino, however,
must conform to the Freedom to Move rule. Again looking at
the same figure, if the Rhino burrows under the White
Ladybug, it must be displaced to space A. With no ‘top of
hive’ movement, the Ladybug must end its turn on ground
level. But due to the Freedom to Move rule as it applies to
bug movement atop the hive (Chapter 10.1), the Ladybug is
not allowed to move between the two stacks of bugs, and thus
cannot be displaced to the space just vacated by the Rhino.
It is possible that this restriction may, in rare instances,
prohibit the Rhino from burrowing under a specific bug.

Page 241

Chapter 10.2 – Additional Bugs
InFigure 10.2.17 (page 241), for instance, if space A had been
occupied, the Black Rhino could not burrow under the White
Ladybug, because the White Ladybug would not be able to be
displaced without violating a Hive® rule.

Figure 10.2.18 shows the options after the Rhino has
burrowed under the White Ant. The White Ant must now be
moved to either space A or space B. Figure 10.2.19 shows the
position after the move has been completed. The Black Rhino
has moved in next to the Black Queen and White Ant #2 has
been pushed out.

Play Hive® Like a Champion
Figure 10.2.18
Special Rhino Movement – Part 2

A

A

B

R

Interaction with Mosquito – When adjacent to a Rhino, the
Mosquito may move exactly like the Rhino, including its
special bug pushing ability.
Movement Notation – When the Rhino uses its special
movement to burrow under another bug and displace it, the
movement of each bug is noted, starting with the Rhino. The
movement of each bug is separated by a colon. (See
Figure 10.2.19.)
Strengths – The most important strength of the Rhino is
its ability to rescue the friendly Queen from a dangerous
situation.

Figure 10.2.19
Special Rhino Movement – Part 3
bR1 wL1-:wA2 wL1/

A

Weaknesses – It is slow moving and will probably take a
while to get into position to use its powerful special ability.

10.2.7 – Walking Stick - W

The Walking Stick is our first two
space bug. It is slow, but its two hex
size allows it to cross an open gate,
move into a blocked space, or fill two
spaces with its initial placement.

Movement – The Walking Stick is a very unique bug starting
with its most obvious feature. It is a double sized bug, it
occupies two adjacent hexes in the hive. At the conclusion of
its move, both halves of the Walking Stick must be in contact
with the hive.

The Walking Stick moves one space in either of two ways.
It may slide along the outside edge of the hive, moving one
space in either direction. In Figure 10.2.20 the White
Walking Stick can move to either space A or to space B.
Moving to space B will result in the position shown in
Figure 10.2.21 (page 243).

Page 242

Figure 10.2.20
Walking Stick Movement – Standard, Part 1
A

B

by Randy Ingersoll
Figure 10.2.21
Walking Stick Movement – Standard, Part 2
after the move
wW1 wA2/:wA2-

Chapter 10.2 – Additional Bugs
Figure 10.2.22
Walking Stick Movement – Special, Part 1
Before the move

A

Or it may pivot on one of its two hexes while moving its other
hex into a new space. In Figure 10.2.22, the White Walking
Stick, pivoting on its lower right hex, may move the upper
left hex into space A. This move results in the position as
shown in Figure 10.2.23.

Placement – Walking Stick placement must obey all standard
placement rules. Additionally, when initially placed, both
halves of the bug must meet the placement requirements. This
means that both halves of the bug must be placed adjacent to
a friendly bug, and neither half of the bug may be in contact
with an opposing bug. In Figure 10.2.24 the gray, labeled
spaces are all available for White new bug placement. Any
two adjacent spaces could be used for placement of a Walking
Stick. Included in this is the pair D-F. Note, however, that a
Walking Stick cannot be placed in space I because there is not
a second, adjacent space that meets the requirements for new
bug placement.

Figure 10.2.23
Walking Stick Movement – Special, Part 2
after the move
wW1 wA2-:wL1-

Figure 10.2.24
Walking Stick Placement

Special Rules – The Walking Stick may not climb atop the
hive. If either half of the Walking Stick is covered by a
Beetle, it is rendered immobile.

Interaction with Mosquito – Due to its unique movement
pattern, it does not convey any special movement to the
Mosquito. When adjacent to a Walking Stick the Mosquito
inherits a one-space, standard movement ability.

Movement Notation – Two reference spaces, separated by a
colon, are needed to notate a Walking Stick’s movement. See
Figure 10.2.21 and Figure 10.2.23 for examples.

A

B

A

C
E
I

D
F

H

G

Strengths – The Walking Stick has the ability to fill two
spaces with only one bug. This is particularly usefull when
the opposing Queen is covered and a direct drop is possible.
Weaknesses – The Walking Stick is slow moving.

Page 243

Chapter 10.2 – Additional Bugs

Play Hive® Like a Champion

10.2.8 – Moth - Mo*

In nature, the moth is nocturnal, attracted to
light, and flies all about. In our hive, the moth
lives only atop the hive, attracted, not to light,
but to bugs of the opposite color. It starts and
remains atop the hive, flying from bug to bug.

Figure 10.2.25
Moth Movement

Movement – The Moth moves from bug to bug across the
top of the hive, stopping when it finds itself atop a bug of
the opposing color. It may not stop on a bug of its own
color. It must stop on the first bug of the opposing color.
On succeeding turns, it may proceed, again stopping on the
first bug of the opposing color.
The Moth has a maximum movement range of three spaces.
If the nearest opposing bug is more than three spaces away,
the Moth may not move.

In Figure 10.2.25 the White Moth may move as indicated by
the arrows. It may stop atop any of the four Black bugs noted:
Black Ant #2, Black Beetle #2, Black Beetle #1, or the Black
Queen. It may pass over, but may not stop on, any of the
White bugs. With movement limited to three spaces, it can
not reach Black Ant #3.

Placement – The Moth is initially placed atop a friendly
piece as shown in Figure 10.2.26. The friendly piece, must
not be adjacent to any opposing pieces. In this figure, the
Moth was placed in the only legal position. Each of the other
White bugs is adjacent to at least one Black bug, and is,
therefore, not legal initial Moth placement positions.
Special Rules – The Moth may never descend off the hive to
ground level.

Interaction with Mosquito – If the Mosquito is already atop
the hive and adjacent to a Moth, it may move using the
Moth’s movement ability.

Movement Notation – No special movement notation is
required for the Moth.
Strengths – As a ‘Top of Hive’ bug, the Moth is able to move
very quickly across the hive.

Weaknesses – The placement rules for the Moth restrict its
usefulness in some ways. The inability to climb down off the
hive cause it to be a primarily defensive bug.

*concept, design and art by Jaroslav Szczepanik a.k.a. Svartisen at BoardSpace

Page 244

G

S

Figure 10.2.26
Moth Placement

G

S

by Randy Ingersoll

Chapter 10.2 – Additional Bugs

10.2.9 – Mite - Mt*

In real life, mites are tiny creatures that live in
many different locations. Our Mite lives atop
the hive, infects the bugs below it, and keeps
them immobile. It is too small to attack the
Queen so it must be used defensively.

Movement – The Mite moves one space at a time across the
top of the hive. In Figure 10.2.27 the White Mite may move
atop any of the four adjacent Black bugs.

Figure 10.2.27
Mite Movement

A
B

Placement – The Mite enters the game atop the Queen of its
own color.
Special Rules – When the Mite moves, its destination space
must be atop the Queen of its own color or atop a bug
adjacent to the Queen of its own color. In Figure 10.2.28 the
White Mite may not move atop either White Beetle #1 or
White Ant #3.

The Mite is smaller than a standard bug. The color of the bug
beneath the Mite is still visible. For placement purposes, the
color of the stack remains the color of the top most full size
bug (not the Mite).
When a Mite enters a space it is placed atop all existing bugs
already in the space. This includes other Mites. Bugs beneath
a Mite may not move.
When a standard, full-size bug with ‘top of hive’ movement
enters a space already containing a Mite, the moving bug is
placed under the Mite.
The Mite may not descend to ground level. In Figure 10.2.27,
the White Mite may not move to either space A or space B.

This defensive ability of the Mite is shown in Figure 10.2.29.
White has just played Beetle #1 as shown to begin a very
common Beetle attack, hopefully leading to a cover of the
Black Queen. By moving the Mite as in turn #10, Black has
placed a barrier to the advance of the White Beetle. If it
should move atop the White Spider, the White Beetle would
end its movement under the Black Mite, and thereby be
immobilized.

Figure 10.2.28 – Movement Restrictions

A
B

Figure 10.2.29 – The Mite on Defense
9 wB1 wS1\
10 bMt1 wS1

10
9

Interaction with Mosquito – The Mosquito gains no
movement ability from the Mite, but does gain movement
from the full-size bug immediately below the Mite.
Movement Notation – No special movement notation is
required for the Mite.

*concept and design by Herman Jacobs a.k.a. Chlorix at BoardSpace, art by
Jaroslav Szczepanik a.k.a. Svartisen at BoardSpace

Page 245

Chapter 10.2 – Additional Bugs

Play Hive® Like a Champion

Strengths – The Mite has been designed as primarily a
defensive bug. Its strength comes from its ability to defend
the Queen, particularly against approaching Beetles.

Weaknesses – As a mini-bug it does not restrict placement of
opposing bugs or allow placement of friendly bugs.

10.2.10 – Flea - F*

In real life, fleas are tiny little bugs that hop
around, from animal to animal. Their bite,
although not dangerous, can be very irritating.
Our Flea is one of the weakest bugs in the hive,
existing only atop the hive.

Movement – The Flea moves exactly two spaces, in a straight
line. In order to move, it must hop over an adjacent bug or
stack of bugs, not an empty space. In Figure 10.2.30 the
White Flea can make any of the three moves as shown. It may
not move to any of the spaces labeled X. Even though these
three spaces are exactly two spaces away, either the move
would take the Flea off the hive or intervening space is not
occupied.

Placement – The Flea is initially placed atop a friendly piece
as shown in Figure 10.2.31. The friendly piece, must not be
adjacent to any opposing pieces. In this figure, the Flea was
placed in the only legal position. Each of the other Black bugs
is adjacent to at least one White bug, and is not legal for
initial Flea placement.

Figure 10.2.30
Flea Movement

X
G

X

X

Figure 10.2.31
Flea Placement

B

Special Rules – The Flea may never descend off the hive to
ground level.

Interaction with Mosquito – If the Mosquito is already atop
the hive and adjacent to a Flea, it may move using the Flea’s
movement ability. In Figure 10.2.32 the Black Mosquito can
use the Flea’s movement and cover White Hopper #3.
Movement Notation – No special movement notation is
required for the Flea.

Strengths – The Flea can move into position and cover an
opposing bug quicker than a Beetle.

Weaknesses – The movement restrictions placed on the Flea
weaken it, even though it does have ‘top of hive’ movement
ability. Care must be taken when placing the Flea to make
sure that it can reach its destintion space.
*concept and design by Calvin Daniels a.k.a. Dulok44 at BoardSpace, art by
Jaroslav Szczepanik a.k.a. Svartisen at BoardSpace

Page 246

Figure 10.2.32
Mosquito-Flea Interaction

B

G

by Randy Ingersoll

Chapter 10.3 – Alphabetical Game Index

Chapter 10.3 - Alphabetical Game Index
Mode

Player 1

Player 2

Date & Time

Game

Chapter & Page

HV
HV
HV
HV
HV
HV
HV
HV

albedo
albedo
Antin
antros
bird
bird
BlackMagic
BlackMagic

ringersoll
ringersoll
ringersoll
ringersoll
ringersoll
ringersoll
ringersoll
ringersoll

2010-08-22-1936
2010-09-14-2230
2011-05-29-1110
2011-01-16-1258
2010-12-03-2326
2010-12-26-2049
2010-10-30-2043
2010-10-30-2103

S
S
S
S
LM
LM
LM
LM

HV
HV
HV
HV
HV
HV
HV
HV
HV

BlackMagic
BlackMagic
BlackMagic
blefinjo
cesc
cesc
cheewee
ddyer
DEIBY

ringersoll
ringersoll
ringersoll
ringersoll
ringersoll
ringersoll
ringersoll
ringersoll
ringersoll

2010-10-31-1413
2010-11-20-1541
2010-11-25-1402
2013-05-05-1828
2010-09-18-1309
2010-10-09-2205
2011-02-17-0134
2010-09-18-0032
2011-06-12-1139

LM
LM
LM
P
S
S
LM
S
S

HV
HV
HV
HV

Desire
Dragonfly
Dragonfly
DrRaven

ringersoll
ringersoll
ringersoll
ringersoll

2010-08-17-2054
2010-10-20-0000
2010-10-21-0036
2011-01-02-0157

M
S
LM
S

HV
HV
HV
HV
HV
HV
HV
HV

DrRaven
EddyMarlo
EddyMarlo
Eucalyx
Eucalyx
fabian
Faxiao
Fumanchu

ringersoll
peter20
peter20
ringersoll
ringersoll
stepanzo
ringersoll
ringersoll

2011-01-18-0249
2011-05-23-0417
2011-05-23-0455
2011-01-16-2025
2011-03-26-1103
2013-07-20-1003
2010-09-18-1906
2010-10-07-2321

LM
LM
LM
L
LM
LMP
S
S

7.17.4 (page 202)
7.6.3 (page 111)
7.1.1 (page 68), 7.1.2 (page 70)
6.3.1 (page 48)
7.14.2 (page 162), 7.16.2 (page 195)
6.3.1 (page 47)
4.5 (page 24)
5.3 (page 28), 7.3.4 (page 86),
7.4.1 (page 89)
7.9.4 (page 129)
7.14.1 (page 162)
4.5 (page 23)
7.15.3 (page 174)
4.4 (page 21)
7.7.1 (page 113)
8.1.4 (page 213)
6.1.3 (page 36)
5.1 (page 26), 7.1.1 (page 67),
7.1.2 (page 69)
7.4.3 (page 93), 7.17.3 (page 202)
8.3 (page 217)
7.14.1 (page 161), 7.17.5 (page 203)
7.2.2 (page 74), 7.2.3 (page 76),
7.2.4 (page 77), 7.2.5 (page 78)
7.6.2 (page 109)
7.3.2 (page 82)
7.11.4 (page 144)
7.10.2 (page 134)
5.2 (page 27), 7.4.3 (page 94)
7.15.15 (page 188)
4.5 (page 23)
7.8.2 (page 122)
Page 247

Chapter 10.3 – Alphabetical Game Index

Play Hive® Like a Champion

Mode

Player 1

Player 2

Date & Time

Game

Chapter & Page

HV
HV
HV
HV
HV
HV
HV
HV
HV
HV
HV
HV
HV
HV
HV
HV
HV
HV

Fumanchu
Fumanchu
Fumanchu
Fumanchu
guest
guest
guest
HoborgHUN
humdeabril
humdeabril
humdeabril
humdeabril
isagooss
jimbly
kanoeboy
Lony
lukiejro
lukiejro

ringersoll
ringersoll
ringersoll
ringersoll
ringersoll
ringersoll
ringersoll
ringersoll
ringersoll
ringersoll
ringersoll
ringersoll
ringersoll
ringersoll
chornyi
ringersoll
ringersoll
ringersoll

2010-11-12-1120
2010-11-13-1314
2011-01-11-0056
2011-02-26-2041
2010-12-07-1154
2012-04-13-2347
2013-05-25-2120
2010-08-25-2259
2010-11-29-0410
2010-12-24-0303
2010-12-25-0431
2011-01-31-2303
2010-08-17-1928
2010-11-28-1500
2011-05-12-1002
2010-09-24-1107
2010-07-29-2043
2010-07-29-2049

LM
LM
LM
LM
LM
S
P
S
LM
M
LM
M
S
S
LM
S
S
S

HV
HV
HV
HV
HV
HV
HV
HV
HV
HV
HV
HV
HV
HV

meche5
meche5
ringersoll
ringersoll
ringersoll
ringersoll
ringersoll
ringersoll
ringersoll
ringersoll
ringersoll
ringersoll
ringersoll
ringersoll

ringersoll
ringersoll
albedo
BlackMagic
blefinjo
cesc
chornyi
Dragonfly
Dragonfly
Fumanchu
Fumanchu
Fumanchu
Fumanchu
guest

2010-09-20-2228
2010-09-20-2243
2010-08-22-2137
2010-11-04-2151
2013-08-03-1154
2010-10-09-1105
2011-02-26-1124
2010-10-21-0108
2010-11-23-0313
2010-09-23-1050
2010-11-21-1420
2011-02-18-1224
2011-02-22-1227
2010-07-22-2044

S
S
S
LM
P
S
S
LM
S
S
LM
S
S
S

7.9.1 (page 126)
7.13.4 (page 157)
7.5.2 (page 98)
7.10.3 (page 136), 7.17.2 (page 201)
7.4.4 (page 95)
6.5.1 (page 58)
7.15.6 (page 179)
8.2 (page 215)
6.2.4 (page 44)
5.8 (page 32), 6.4.3 (page 53)
7.5.4 (page 103)
6.4.4 (page 54)
9.4.1 (page 227)
7.6.1 (page 105)
7.13.3 (page 156)
7.10.1 (page 132)
8.4 (page 218)
6.2.1 (page 41), 6.2.2 (page 42),
6.2.3 (page 43), 7.3.1 (page 82),
7.17.6 (page 204)
7.16.1 (page 193)
7.8.1 (page 119)
6.1.1 (page 34)
5.1 (page 25), 8.1.2 (page 210)
6.5.2 (page 59)
7.10.2 (page 133)
7.5.2 (page 99), 7.5.3 (page 101)
8.5 (page 220)
6.3.2 (page 49), 7.7.3 (page 118)
5.5 (page 30)
5.6 (page 30)
6.2.2 (page 42), 7.17.2 (page 200)
7.11.5 (page 146)
3.6 (page 18)

Page 248

by Randy Ingersoll

Chapter 10.3 – Alphabetical Game Index

Mode

Player 1

Player 2

Date & Time

Game

Chapter & Page

HV
HV
HV
HV
HV
HV
HV
HV
HV
HV
HV
T!HV
T!HV
T!HV
T!HV
T!HV
T!HV

ringersoll
ringersoll
ringersoll
ringersoll
ringersoll
roman65
seneca29
Vindicator
walkie
weronika
xenotime
DrRaven
dynamical
EddyMarlo
Fumanchu
Fumanchu
Fumanchu

guest
humdeabril
PansORama
river
roman65
ringersoll
ringersoll
ringersoll
Dulok44
ringersoll
ringersoll
EddyMarlo
Eucalyx
DrRaven
ringersoll
ringersoll
ringersoll

2011-04-24-1840
2010-12-27-2254
2010-10-24-2145
2012-04-07-1405
2010-11-08-1116
2010-11-08-1128
2011-09-17-1536
2010-11-17-0003
2011-05-11-2256
2010-12-08-1205
2010-11-23-2326
2011-06-29-1850
2013-05-15-0418
2011-06-28-1708
2011-06-26-1833
2011-06-29-2314
2011-07-02-1918

LM
M
LM
LM
S
S
S
LM
LM
LM
S
LM
P
L
L
LM
LM

T!HV

Fumanchu

ringersoll

2011-07-03-1907

LM

T!HV
T!HV
T!HV
T!HV
T!HV

Kobajagi
Loizz
Loizz
reh191
ringersoll

ringersoll
ringersoll
ringersoll
ringersoll
DrRaven

2013-05-12-1950
2011-06-13-2246
2011-06-13-2356
2013-05-04-0959
2011-07-07-0031

P
L
L
P
L

T!HV
T!HV
T!HV
T!HV
T!HV
T!HV
T!HV
T!HV

ringersoll
ringersoll
ringersoll
ringersoll
ringersoll
ringersoll
ringersoll
ringersoll

Fumanchu
Fumanchu
Fumanchu
Fumanchu
Fumanchu
Kobajagi
stepanzo
stepanzo

2011-06-27-2357
2011-06-28-2316
2011-07-02-1812
2011-07-02-2014
2011-07-03-1957
2013-05-19-1901
2013-06-15-0955
2013-06-23-1000

LM
LM
L
L
LM
LP
LMP
LMP

7.14.3 (page 165)
9.3.1 (page 226)
8.6 (page 221)
6.5.3 (page 62)
7.10.3 (page 135)
7.6.2 (page 108)
6.1.5 (page 39)
7.14.2 (page 163)
7.12.5 (page 154)
7.14.3 (page 166)
7.2.1 (page 73)
7.14.2 (page 163)
7.12.4 (page 153)
7.8.4 (page 123)
7.14.4 (page 168)
7.14.4 (page 168)
7.3.1 (page 82), 7.13.6 (page 159),
7.14.4 (page 168)
7.14.4 (page 168), 7.16.3 (page 196),
7.16.4 (page 197), 9.4.1 (page 227)
7.15.10 (page 184), 7.15.11 (page 185)
7.11.5 (page 146), 7.16.4 (page 198)
6.4.1 (page 51)
7.15.12 (page 186)
7.11.2 (page 141), 7.11.4 (page 143),
7.17.7 (page 206)
7.14.4 (page 168)
7.14.4 (page 167 & 168)
7.14.4 (page 168)
7.14.4 (page 168), 7.16.2 (page 194)
6.4.1 (page 51), 7.14.4 (page 168)
7.15.13 (page 187)
6.5.1 (page 58)
7.15.15 (page 191)
Page 249

Chapter 10.3 – Alphabetical Game Index

Play Hive® Like a Champion

Mode

Player 1

Player 2

Date & Time

Game

Chapter & Page

T!HV
T!HV
T!HV
TU!HV
U!HV
U!HV
U!HV

Salish99
stepanzo
stepanzo
gideonbob
BadBunny
Benihona
bird

Fumanchu
DrRaven
ringersoll
Eucalyx
ringersoll
fabian
ringersoll

2011-05-11-1845
2013-06-27-0201
2013-06-14-1515
2011-05-24-2005
2013-07-09-1025
2013-06-27-1745
2010-12-11-1848

L
P
P
L
P
LMP
LM

U!HV
U!HV
U!HV
U!HV
U!HV
U!HV
U!HV
U!HV

bird
bird
BlackMagic
BlackMagic
blefinjo
cesc
cheewee
diogocrist

ringersoll
ringersoll
ringersoll
ringersoll
guest
ringersoll
ringersoll
ringersoll

2010-12-12-2109
2011-01-08-1517
2010-11-25-2138
2010-12-01-0040
2013-05-19-1053
2010-10-03-1513
2011-02-17-0147
2010-12-02-0150

LM
LM
S
S
P
S
LM
L

U!HV
U!HV
U!HV
U!HV
U!HV
U!HV
U!HV
U!HV

DrRaven
DrRaven
DrRaven
DrRaven
DrRaven
Dumbot
Eucalyx
Eucalyx

ringersoll
ringersoll
ringersoll
ringersoll
ringersoll
ringersoll
ringersoll
ringersoll

2011-01-19-0226
2011-02-08-0123
2011-02-15-0139
2011-04-30-0238
2011-05-29-1857
2011-01-23-1232
2010-08-22-1100
2010-08-29-1321

S
LM
M
L
L
LM
S
S

U!HV

Eucalyx

ringersoll

2010-08-30-2234

S

U!HV
U!HV
U!HV
U!HV
U!HV
U!HV
U!HV

Eucalyx
Eucalyx
fabian
FishBoy
FLX
Fumanchu
fungames

ringersoll
ringersoll
stepanzo
ringersoll
ringersoll
ringersoll
ringersoll

2010-12-09-1213
2011-02-13-2216
2013-06-23-0951
2010-12-16-0027
2011-03-23-2215
2010-12-16-1606
2013-05-03-2142

LM
LM
LMP
LM
S
LM
P

7.14.1 (page 162)
7.15.9 (page 182)
7.11.6 (page 147), 7.15.5 (page 178)
9.3.2 (page 226)
7.15.4 (page 178)
7.15.15 (page 190)
7.2.2 (page 75), 7.2.3 (page 76),
7.14.3 (page 165)
5.7 (page 31), 7.4.2 (page 91)
7.5.1 (page 97)
7.12.2 (page 150)
9.2.1 (page 225)
7.15.4 (page 176), 7.15.10 (page 184)
7.6.4 (page 111)
5.4 (page 29)
5.1 (page 26), 6.1.1 (page 33),
9.2.2 (page 225)
7.1.3 (page 70)
6.4.2 (page 52)
4.4 (page 23), 6.1.3 (page 36)
7.6.2 (page 109)
7.6.2 (page 108)
8.1.1 (page 209)
7.1.1 (page 68), 7.7.3 (page 118)
6.1.1 (page 34), 6.1.2 (page 35),
7.10.1 (page 131), 7.17.1 (page 199)
6.1.2 (page 35), 7.11.1 (page 139),
7.11.2 (page 141)
6.1.4 (page 37)
7.7.2 (page 114)
2.8 (page 13)
7.11.3 (page 142), 8.3 (page 216)
6.3.3 (page 49)
7.13.2 (page 156)
7.15.1 (page 170)

Page 250

by Randy Ingersoll

Chapter 10.3 – Alphabetical Game Index

Mode

Player 1

Player 2

Date & Time

Game

Chapter & Page

U!HV
U!HV
U!HV
U!HV
U!HV
U!HV
U!HV
U!HV
U!HV
U!HV
U!HV
U!HV
U!HV
U!HV
U!HV
U!HV
U!HV
U!HV
U!HV
U!HV
U!HV
U!HV
U!HV
U!HV
U!HV
U!HV
U!HV
U!HV
U!HV
U!HV
U!HV
U!HV
U!HV
U!HV

guest
guest
guest
image13
isearch12
Juamax
kkurtonis
kkurtonis
kkurtonis
kkurtonis
Kobajagi
LadyBrawne
lucassus
OlegT
Queribus
ringersoll
ringersoll
ringersoll
ringersoll
ringersoll
ringersoll
ringersoll
ringersoll
ringersoll
ringersoll
ringersoll
ringersoll
ringersoll
ringersoll
ringersoll
ringersoll
ringersoll
ringersoll
ringersoll

ringersoll
ringersoll
ringersoll
stepanzo
ringersoll
ringersoll
ringersoll
ringersoll
ringersoll
ringersoll
ringersoll
ringersoll
ringersoll
ringersoll
ringesoll
cesc
DrRaven
DrRaven
DrRaven
DrRaven
Eucalyx
Eucalyx
Eucalyx
Eucalyx
Fumanchu
gierek
guest
HoborgHUN
humdeabril
image13
image13
Juamax
kkurtonis
lucassus

2011-01-28-2333
2011-01-28-2345
2013-04-16-0058
2013-05-15-1602
2010-09-19-0157
2013-04-17-2138
2013-03-30-2357
2013-04-02-0001
2013-05-08-2142
2013-05-22-1657
2013-05-10-2220
2013-05-16-2336
2011-02-13-1932
2012-03-31-1858
2013-04-05-2155
2010-09-18-1355
2011-02-07-2248
2011-02-07-2318
2011-02-16-0208
2011-04-17-0130
2010-08-15-2102
2010-10-23-2212
2011-01-29-2201
2013-04-27-1111
2011-05-08-1829
2012-02-04-1949
2011-06-07-2237
2011-01-15-2116
2011-01-04-1137
2013-03-03-1223
2013-05-12-1249
2013-04-17-2221
2013-04-19-2304
2011-02-13-2044

S
S
LMP
P
M
P
P
P
P
P
P
LMP
S
S
P
S
LM
LM
LM
LM
S
L
L
LMP
L
S
S
S
LM
P
LMP
P
P
S

8.2 (page 214)
7.1.3 (page 71), 7.12.1 (page 149)
7.15.13 (page 187)
7.15.9 (page 183)
7.3.4 (page 87)
7.15.1 (page 170)
7.15.4 (page 177)
2.8 (page 12)
7.15.2 (page 171), 7.15.14 (page 188)
7.15.1 (page 169)
7.15.10 (page 184)
7.15.15 (page 192)
4.3 (page 21), 7.17.7 (page 207)
6.5.5 (page 64)
7.15.11 (page 185)
7.2.5 (page 79), 7.9.3 (page 127)
7.8.1 (page 121)
6.4.2 (page 52)
7.13.5 (page 158)
7.13.1 (page 155)
8.1.3 (page 211)
3.6 (page 18), 8.1.3 (page 212)
8.1.3 (page 212)
7.15.7 (page 180)
7.9.2 (page 126)
6.5.4 (page 63)
7.9.1 (page 125)
7.11.1 (page 140)
7.6.3 (page 110)
7.15.2 (page 172)
7.15.12 (page 186)
7.15.3 (page 175)
7.15.3 (page 173)
8.5 (page 219), 9.3.3 (page 226)
Page 251

Chapter 10.3 – Alphabetical Game Index

Play Hive® Like a Champion

Mode

Player 1

Player 2

Date & Time

Game

Chapter & Page

U!HV
U!HV
U!HV
U!HV
U!HV
U!HV
U!HV
U!HV
U!HV
U!HV
U!HV
U!HV
U!HV

ringersoll
ringersoll
ringersoll
robodino
Sutured
toh
Wak
weronika
weronika
weronika
weronika
weronika
Sutured

pirtscire
preve
reh191
ringersoll
ringersoll
ringersoll
ringersoll
ringersoll
ringersoll
ringersoll
ringersoll
ringersoll
ringersoll

2010-10-23-1630
2013-04-14-2130
2013-05-12-1739
2011-01-02-0110
2013-07-27-1617
2011-02-21-0339
2013-09-15-0005
2010-12-04-2229
2010-12-04-2247
2010-12-08-2255
2010-12-11-1459
2011-01-11-2256
2013-07-27-1636

L
P
P
S
S
S
LM
S
S
LM
LM
S
S

U!HV

wisewol

ringersoll

2013-05-21-1808

P

6.1.1 (page 33)
7.15.8 (page 181)
6.5.2 (page 60)
7.6.1 (page 106)
6.5.2 (page 60), 6.5.3 (page 61)
8.4 (page 217), 8.6 (page 220)
7.10.4 (page 137)
7.3.3 (page 84)
7.4.1 (page 91)
7.8.3 (page 123)
7.9.4 (page 129), 7.14.3 (page 165)
7.12.3 (page 151)
6.5.1 (page 57), 6.5.2 (page 59),
6.5.3 (page 61), 6.5.4 (page 63),
6.5.6 (page 65)
7.15.2 (page 171)

Page 252

by Randy Ingersoll

Chapter 10.3 – Alphabetical Game Index

Page 253

